You've written one of the best-selling
books in history about habits because
people always need more practical help
with implementing their habits. And I
have different strategies and different
tools to get habits to stick, including
one principle that is probably the
single most important for building
habits, but so much of it is about
mastering the art of getting started.
>> Let's get started then. James Clear is
one of the world's leading habit
experts. is educating millions to build
lasting habits, master goal setting, and
ultimately redesign their lives.
>> There are four different stages that
every habit goes through. Q, craving,
response, and reward. So, first, we want
to make it obvious. Easier it is to see
or get your attention, the more likely
you are to act on it. The second is
about the craving. It's all about making
it attractive. And the more engaging or
exciting it is, the more likely you are
to stick with it. The third is to make
it easy. The easier a habit is to
perform, the more likely it is to
happen. And then the fourth and final
one is to make it satisfying. And that's
about increasing the odds that you do it
next time. [music] And there's some
tools that we can go through. But one of
the big takeaways from atomic habits is
it's easier [music] to build a new habit
if you stack it on top of the habit
you're already doing. So let's say that
your current habit is you make a cup of
coffee. And the new habit that you want
to build is you want to start
meditating. So then you could say, "All
right, after I make my morning cup of
coffee, I will meditate for 60 seconds."
And you can do it for anything. There's
also a framework that I call hats,
haircuts, and tattoos. the secret to
winning, habit shaping, and real lesson
of getting 1% better every day. And we
can talk about all of them.
>> But is there any frameworks, any
tactics? If you're trying to break a
habit, if you want to break a bad habit,
there's some things that you can do.
>> James, the book has shaped tens and tens
and tens of millions of lives, is there
anything you look back on that you
regret? If I could add something, I
would add this because if you really
want to make progress again and again,
if you want to get to the top and stay
at the top and you need to be able to
I see messages all the time in the
comment section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you.
[music]
>> James, you've written thousands and
thousands of things, but one particular
thing you wrote called Atomic Habits is
one of the bestselling books in history.
Um, it is rumored to be potentially
in the top 100 books that have sold in
history of all time, but also rumored to
be potentially the youngest book to make
the top 100 books in history. My
question is,
what has the success of Atomic Habits
taught you about the nature of humanity
and humans?
We all have habits. We all need habits.
You know, it's one of those really it's
an interesting concept because it is
both universal in the sense that we all
have them, we all need them, but it's
also highly individual. Your habits feel
like your habits, not mine, you know,
and [clears throat] so it's both
universal and specific. Uh, and that's
that's an interesting contrast, and I
think it leads to one of the reasons why
people are so interested in the topic.
You know, we all have them. We all need
them. We all feel like they're our own,
and we want to come up with our little
version of them. But the habit also is
like an entrance ramp to how you spend
your time in other ways. Like the habit
of pulling out your phone, that habit
might only take two seconds to do, but
then it might dictate what you do for
the next hour. You know, you're
answering emails or browsing social
media or playing a video game or
whatever. And it was really the initial
habit of pulling out the phone that
shaped what that hour did. So the
influence of our habits is enormous. You
know, in a lot of ways, your your
results in life are kind of a lagging
measure of the habits that precede them.
You know, like your knowledge is a
lagging measure of your reading and
learning habits. Your bank account is a
lagging measure of your financial
habits. Even silly stuff like the amount
of clutter in your living room is the
lagging measure of your cleaning habits.
And so, we all so badly want our
outcomes to change, you know, we also
badly want our results to change, but
the results are not actually the thing
that needs to change. It's like fix the
habits and the results will fix
themselves. Change the inputs and the
outputs will shift automatically.
>> And it's funny because the book has
shaped tens and tens and tens of
millions of lives, but it also must have
shaped you in some ways.
>> Oh, of course. In a way, I had to learn
the concepts to write the book. Like I
had to build writing habits to write the
book. The fact that I have struggled
with habits and failed with them. The
fact that I've tried things and it
hasn't worked out. The fact that I have
eventually broken through and been able
to build habits. that all of that made
the book better because you realize how
hard it is to have something practical
to say. I actually think I have this
little theory that uh a lot of books are
branded as how-to books, but they're
actually what to books. They tell you
what to think. You should be confident.
You should believe in yourself. You
should take XYZ action, but they don't
actually tell you how to do those
things.
>> And in and in hindsight, is there
anything you look back on that you
regret about the book?
>> I don't think there's anything that I
regret. If I could add something, I
would add something. I would add this
simple question, which is, what would it
look like if this was fun? What would it
look like if your habits were fun? Like
the most common New Year's resolution is
to do some form of exercise. So, you
know, I feel like a lot of people are
going to the gym in January because they
feel like they should go to the gym or
society wants them to go to the gym, you
know, or there's some kind of social
pressure to go to the gym. But if we
were to come up with a list of what it
means to be active and fit, you know,
and healthy, we could come up with a
long list of things. Go to the gym and
lift weights. You could kayak, rock
climb, do yoga, pilates, what, like, you
know, we could probably sit here for
like 15 minutes and come up with a real
long list. And for most of your habits,
if it's an important habit to you, I
think it's worth it to take 10 minutes
and write that list out and then look at
it at the end and say, "What would this
look like if it was fun? what's which of
these options is the most fun to me. And
that doesn't mean that your habits will
be like the most fun thing that you do
each day. You know, it's not like it's
always going to feel like going to a
concert or something, but it does mean
that pretty much any habit can be more
fun than the default, you know? So, you
might as well take a little bit of time
to figure out what is the fun version of
this. And ultimately, I think the reason
why this matters is that if you're
having fun, you're more likely to stick
with it. You're more likely to
persevere. The person who's having fun
is actually the person who's dangerous.
Like you don't want to compete with them
because they're having a good time. When
it gets difficult, they're way more
likely to stick with it. The person who
it felt like a hassle at the start was
kind of, you know, annoying. They sort
of have a negative frame around the the
behavior to begin with. Well, as soon as
it gets difficult, they didn't want to
do it in the first place. So, they're
much more likely to give up. David
Epstein, who's the author of uh Range
and Sports Genius, friend of mine, um he
told me once, "Grit is fit." Grit is
fit. And what he means is that everybody
wants to be gritty. They want to
persevere. But the way that you display
that grit and discipline and
perseverance is in areas where you are
well suited, where it's a good fit for
you. If [clears throat] it's a good fit,
if you're well suited for it, if you're
having fun, if you're interested and
engaged, then you're way more likely to
stick with it. And so, in a lot of ways,
I feel like the biggest hurdle to clear,
and this is true maybe for life in
general, but definitely for habits,
because everybody wants to be consistent
with their habits. Everybody wants to
stick to them. The biggest hurdle to
clear is are you interested? Are are you
engaged? Are you having fun? And so the
more that you can get closer to that,
the more fun it can be, the more likely
you are to persevere and stick with it.
>> I was just thinking about this idea
actually the other day because I I was
writing when we hit a subscriber
milestone. I was writing to think about
what actually mattered the most. And one
of the first thing I wrote was creating
the conditions to out persist.
>> And what I mean by that is like create
the conditions so that you can do this
for long enough that things start
compounding in your favor. like learning
starts compounding in your favor like
the the returns like the the subscribers
or it could be your finances whatever
start compounding in your favor.
>> The question that you asked is very
similar to one that I ask myself a lot
which is am I creating the conditions
for success. So I had a really good
stretch of training in the gym and then
uh about two and a half years ago I was
in pretty good shape and then I had a
year where it was just like really
inconsistent. I missed a lot of workouts
things sometimes it would go well
sometimes it wouldn't whatever. And
after that year I was like okay I got to
change something. And on the surface,
you look at it and you think, I'm having
trouble with the workouts. You think
there's some problem with, you know,
exercise, but that was actually not the
problem. The problem was I wasn't
creating the conditions for success.
>> And so, there were lots of other things
that were intervening and like making
interrupting my day and making it easy
for me to miss. So, this last year, I
hired a trainer and he shows up at 11:00
a.m. every, you know, four days a week.
And when he gets there, every single
time it's a hassle because I'm in the
middle of something. Um, right? every
time I've got something going on and I
kind of am like annoyed by it that he's
there, but we're creating the conditions
for success and it makes sure that I get
down there and I do it and then every
time when I get done with the workout,
I'm like, I'm glad I took the time to do
that. Um, and so nothing really needed
to change with the workout. That was not
the problem. The problem was I didn't
have the right conditions to start the
workout. M
>> and so I think this actually reveals a
really deep and important thing about
habits which is
so much of it is about mastering the art
of getting started. It's making it easy
to start in a way like probably 70% of
what's in atomic habits are different
strategies and different ideas and
different tools that help you get
started or makes starting easier. This
trainer who I've been working with now
he he came over the other day and he
told me, "Yeah, I had a class in the
morning. eight people were supposed to
come, but it was like it was a pretty
gross day. It was like rainy and wet and
kind of cold and only two people showed
up. And I was talking to him about it
and I said, "What's interesting to me
about that is how little of an edge you
need to gain an advantage." You know,
really what we're talking about there is
you just need to be okay with being
inconvenienced or uncomfortable for like
5 to 10 minutes getting dressed, getting
through the rain, getting into your car,
getting to the gym. The workout is the
same that it's always been. It's the
same. you're in the same gym that you
are in the summer or when the weather's
beautiful or whatever. So, it's really
can you handle that like five minutes of
inconvenience.
>> And so many things in life are like
that. Can you master that little moment?
And if you can and you can still get
started, that's when you gain an
advantage. Everybody works out on the
good days. But on the days when you feel
stressed and tired, on the days when the
weather's bad and it's kind of
inconvenient, on the days when you don't
really feel like it, can you show up?
even if it's in a small way. One of my
little mantras that I try to keep in
mind is reduce the scope but stick to
the schedule. So the normal scope might
be I write for 30 minutes and then you
look up at the clock and you're like I
only have 15. And sometimes what happens
in your head is you're like oh I don't
have enough time to write today. Or
you're like oh I was planning to work
out for 60 minutes and you look up and
you're like time got away from me. I
only have 20 minutes now. I don't have
time to go to the gym. It's easy to talk
yourself out of it but reduce the scope
but stick to the schedule. It's like,
well, I only got 20 minutes instead of
60, so I'll just get in there and do a
couple sets of squats and that's it. And
I've had so many workouts that have been
like that where you're like almost, you
know, it's easy to be kind of
disappointed you weren't able to do the
whole thing that you wanted to do. But
you didn't throw up a zero. And if you
don't throw up a zero, you maintain the
habit. And if you maintain the habit,
all you need is time. And so the bad
days are more important than the good
days in that sense. You need to figure
out how do you show up even if when it's
not optimal.
>> And that first five minutes. Yeah, I was
thinking about all the the first five
minute battles that I've won over the
last week because I've, you know, I lost
track of my workout. I've been traveling
through Asia on this tour I've been
doing. Got back, fallen off. The
motivation doesn't seem to be quite the
same as it was before I left. [laughter]
So, it's like I'm dragging myself there.
The workouts are like four out of 10.
Um, but I went.
>> Yeah.
>> And now I'm I think the momentum is
building. But that first 5 minute point,
is there anything that you've learned,
any frameworks, any tactics for for
making sure you you get past that first
5 minutes so you can get into the the
flow of the habit?
>> Yeah, there's multiple things. So first
thing is try to prime the environment to
make the first action easy. Prime the
environment to make the first action
easy. So let's say writing for example.
I find that for myself the biggest point
of friction is choosing what to write
about. Once I've actually finally
settled, this is the thing I'm writing
today, then I can get into it and I'm
off and running. Um, but I'll sit there
for two hours just debating whether it's
the right thing to be focused on writing
or not. You know, should I work on this
chapter? Should I work on something else
or whatever. So, what I've started to do
is sometimes I will write the first
sentence of what I'm going to write and
just leave it on the Google doc right
there and then leave. And the next day
when I come back, I'm already in, right?
Like it's already the first sentence is
already written. So now I'm just writing
the next piece of what's coming rather
than trying to choose what to write
about.
>> Another one that I've done sometimes is
I will write sometimes I'll write the
topic or I'll write the sentence on a
post-it note and I'll put it on top of
the keyboard and so when I come into the
office it's right there in front of I
can't you know I got to pick it off the
keys to log onto the computer and so
it's like remember this is what you're
writing about right now you know so it's
just trying to make it easy to get in. I
have a bunch of readers who do stuff
like set their running out running
clothes out the night before, you know,
so they're right next to the bed. You
got your clothes and your shoes there. I
one woman I just talked to uh her at an
event. She came up afterward and she
said, "I actually sleep in my running
clothes and just get out and get put her
shoes on and goes right out the door."
But you're trying to prime the
environment to make the action easy.
Okay. So, how can you set up the spaces
that you're in uh to prime those habits?
I think one really interesting question
to ask, walk into the rooms where you
spend most of your time each day, your
office, your living room, your bedroom,
and then look around and ask yourself,
what is this space designed to
encourage? What behaviors are easy here?
What behaviors are obvious here? And the
good habits that you say you want to
build, are those the path of least
resistance? Is that the obvious thing in
this environment? And if not, maybe you
can make some adjustments to try to make
the good habit easier and the
distractions maybe a little bit harder.
So that's first thing, prime the
environment to make the action easy.
Second thing is if there's like one
principle that is probably the single
most important for building habits, it's
make it easy. Just scale it down and
make it easy. I refer to it sometimes as
the two-minute rule. So take whatever
habit you're trying to work on, you
scale it down to something that takes
two minutes or less to do. Read 30 books
a year becomes read one page or do yoga
four days a week becomes take out my
yoga mat.
Sometimes I will mention this to people
and they resist it a little bit. You
know, they're like, "Okay, buddy." Like,
I know the real goal isn't just to take
my yoga mat out. You know, I know I'm
actually trying to do the workout. So,
this is some kind of mental trick and I
know it's a trick. Then why would I fall
for it? Basically, but there's this guy,
I mentioned him in Atomic Habits, his
name is Mitch. And he went to the gym
and for the first six weeks, he had this
strange little rule for himself where he
wasn't allowed to stay for longer than 5
minutes. So, you get in the car, drive
to the gym, get out, do half an
exercise, get back in the car, drive
home. And you're like, "This sounds
silly, right? Clearly, this is not going
to get the guy the results that he
wants." But what you realize is that he
was mastering the art of showing up,
right? He was becoming the type of
person that went to the gym four days a
week, even if it was only for five
minutes. And so, I think this is kind of
a deep truth about habits, which is a
habit must be established before it can
be improved. you know, has to become the
standard in your life before you
optimize and scale it up into something
more. There's that quote from Ed
Latimore where he says, "The heaviest
weight at the gym is the front door."
There are a lot of things in life that
are like that. And so, by trying to make
it easy to master, to easy to get
started, um then you're in the game now.
You're in the arena. There's all kinds
of things you can improve from there. I
remember um Jordan Peterson saying
talking about his some of his clinical
um patients and referring to one in
particular who was in a room full of
junk and couldn't leave the room because
of a certain fear and certain
psychological problems he had. And
Jordan saying that day one they just
brought the Hoover into the room and
that was it. Day two they plugged the
Hoover in and that was it. And then by
day like 30 the guy is out of the room,
the room is clean and he's walking
around outside for the first time in in
months or years. And he goes on to say
that the reason why people don't get
started is because the first step is so
embarrassing. People think that it's not
worth it or that it's like shameful to
do. It's like almost like patronizingly
embarrassing. And um I've always kept
that in mind uh since then and when from
your work as well just that assume the
first steps are like embarrassingly
small.
>> There's this process called habit
shaping which is is basically like that.
Um, you know, like if you want to run a
half marathon, the first day the step
might be to put on your running shoes
and then the second day the step is to
like walk outside the front door and the
third day the step is to go around the
block. And you know, you're just like
gradually shaping into this this larger
habit. But there's this thing that
happens when people think about building
better habits. I think particularly
ambitious people, it's very easy to get
excited about all the changes you can
make. You start thinking, even if you
don't say this explicitly, you think
like, what would peak performance look
like? you know, if I could really get my
habits dialed in, what could I do? And
you start imagining five, six, seven
things that you would do and what all of
them would look like in their perfect
form and so on. And I think instead of
asking ourselves, what could I do on my
best day, it's better to start by asking
what can I stick to even on the bad
days? And that becomes your baseline.
That becomes the first step. And now
that you have this floor that is
achievable even when you're tired, even
when you're exhausted, even when you
don't have much time, now you can show
up and feel like you're succeeding, you
know, and then you can progress from
there. One of the most motivating
feelings to the human mind is a feeling
of progress. If you feel like you're
making progress, even if it's smaller
than what you ultimately hope to do, you
have every reason to move forward. But
often we become like a victim of our
expectations. We ex we spend all this
time optimizing the perfect plan and
then expect things to go perfectly out
of the gate and you had it so built up
in your mind that once you don't hit
that mark in the f first or second or
third day it falls apart.
>> And you talked earlier on about sitting
there for two hours thinking about what
to write. I I think I've learned through
through business and in the first
iteration of my career where I worked
with CEOs and executives that were
planning marketing campaigns that
actually in hindsight often the biggest
cost wasn't being wrong. It was the time
you waste making a decision. You see
this if you've ever you've interacted
with so many big corporations. Yeah.
Like they spend 18 months thinking about
>> get waiting for Joanna to come back from
annual leave to get procurement to sign
off the thing. And I worked with this
one particular founder during that
season of my life who where I was
working with his dad and him and his dad
would take nine months because the
company was so big. His son would
interrupt me halfway through the idea
and call us all in and say do it now.
And he taught me that actually in life
that the biggest cost is the time you
waste making the decision. And I think
about that with my own habits. I think
sometimes sitting around thinking about
whether I'm going to run today is
costing me much more than just [__]
And do you think about how you kill that
mental debate? Like is that an effective
strategy to try and kill the debate and
not make a decision per se?
>> Yeah. So speed is perpetually
undervalued. That's for sure. Life is
short and so the sooner that you make
decisions, the sooner you get
information. Now, I will say I I have a
little framework that I call hats,
haircuts, and tattoos. And this is how
how I kind of think about it. So, a lot
of decisions are like hats. Just try you
try one hat. If you don't like it, take
it off. You can try another. It's just
real quick. You you know, you get some
information. Speed is most important.
Move quickly, get some information,
learn something. If it was wrong, it's
not that big of a deal. Just take it off
and put a new hat on. Haircut is a
little bit trickier. It's a It's a
decision that you have to live with for
a little bit. you know, like you're okay
if you get a bad haircut, but you're
gonna you're gonna have to live with it
for a month or two. You know, it's it's
going to take a little bit of time for
it to grow out. And so, it's probably
not a big deal to be scared of getting a
bad haircut. I think a lot of people
probably talk themselves out of it. It's
like, you'll be fine in a month. It's
it's fine. Tattoos are trickier. You
know, you get a tattoo, you got to live
with that choice. It's permanent. And
so, if a really what we're getting at
here is, is the choice reversible or is
the choice irreversible? If the choice
is easy to reverse, speed is most
important. You should move fast. If it's
hard to reverse and you got to live with
it, then you need to think carefully
before you make the call. Um, and I
think probably what you're seeing uh
through some of your experiences is that
most decisions in life are hats and
haircuts. It's very rare that you end up
with a tattoo,
>> but we treat them all like tattoos.
>> We Yeah, we uh I think in particular we
are we are scared, particularly the bad
haircuts. I think the ones that like
linger for just a little bit, but not
that long. It's like it's going to take
you a month to fix this if if you get it
wrong, but like that's fine. a month's
going to pass anyway. Um, and so it's
not that big of a deal, but we we act
like it's a bigger deal than it is.
>> Is there a particular case study or
story from a Atomic Habits community
member or someone that reads your
newsletter
that has been the most impactful for
you?
>> There's not a single one. There are lots
that I'm like proud of or really excited
by, ones I'm surprised by. Um, I heard
from a guy the other day, he was the
head coach at St. Olaf's University in
Minnesota and men's soccer. And when he
came in, their record was something like
five and 13 and they were, you know,
like near the bottom of the standings.
And he was like, I read Atomic Habits
right around the time I took this job.
And we came up with systems for
everything we did. We taught our players
systems for how they tie their shoes and
cleats to get ready for the game. We
taught them systems for how they prepped
for practice. We taught them systems for
their role on the field. And uh, you
know, gradually they improved each year,
five and 13. Then they went like eight
and eight. And then the next year after
that they won the conference. And then
the year after that they went to the
NCAA Sweet 16 and then five years later
they won the national championship. You
know, of course stuff like that's
awesome to hear about, right? You're
like they went from they went from five
wins uh in and then in five years later
they win the national title. But the
ones that matter to me the most are the
ones that I hear from somebody and they
say um I finally feel better. You know,
I feel different. I look in the mirror
and I'm like proud of who I am or uh my
kids tell me that they're excited to
see, you know, the change in me or
things like that. And that's what it's
always been about, you know, it's always
been about becoming the type of person
that you want to be. And so I think uh
anytime I I hear stories like that, I
think it's exciting.
>> So when this um was it a coach or was it
>> Yeah, Travis Wall is the head coach at
St. Olaf's. Um he's the head coach at
Kenyon. Uh now,
>> so he talked about systems there. Most
of us think about to-do lists and goals
and those kinds of things. What what is
the difference between a system and a
goal?
>> I was very goal driven for a long time.
I I mean, I probably still am. You know,
I don't think there's any way to get
around the fact that we all have goals
and think about the outcomes we want and
so on. But a goal is about the outcome
that you want to achieve and a system is
about the process for getting there. And
so your goal is the target, the outcome,
the thing you're shooting for. Your
system is the collection of daily habits
that you follow. And if there is ever a
gap between your goal and your system,
if there's ever a gap between your
desired outcome and your daily habits,
your daily habits will always win,
>> you know. And so almost by definition,
your current habits are perfectly
designed to deliver your current
results. You know, if you want to see
like where you're going to end up, just
follow the trajectory of your habits.
you know what's the process you've been
running for the last 6 months or year or
two years and they've carried you almost
inevitably to the outcomes that you have
right now I'm not saying that habits are
the only thing that matter in life right
like strategy matters luck randomness uh
those misfortune those things can
influence the outcome but by definition
luck and randomness are not under your
control
>> and your habits are and the only
reasonable rational approach in life is
to focus on the pieces that are within
your control so I think goals can be
good for setting a sense of direction.
They're good for clarity. You know,
especially if you have a team, get
everybody rowing in the same direction.
But once you've decided what the goal
is, you should basically set it on the
shelf, metaphorically speaking, and
spend the vast majority of your time
focused on building a better system. How
are the habits we're executing each day
moving us closer to this outcome that we
want? And so where I've come after
talking about this for five or six years
now since book's been out, where I've
come down on it is goals are best for
people who care about winning once.
Systems are best for people who care
about winning repeatedly. If you really
want to make progress again and again,
if you want to get to the top and stay
at the top, you need some process for
staying up there. Some collection of
habits that's going to keep uh this
machine running. So this is why, you
know, I say in the book, we don't rise
to level of our goals, we fall to level
of our systems. As you were talking, I
was thinking so much about about
business and founders and entrepreneurs
because they all have big goals. We want
to build the best AI app or the best I
don't know restaurant and we they stay
really focused on those. But the great
the greatest founders that I think I've
met and interviewed on this show are
actually really orientated on like what
you call in the book first principles
and systems. Mhm.
>> Is there a way to to become more
orientated towards systems and and
thinking about first principles like the
the habits that lead to the goal is or
is it just just so that some people have
it cuz like Elon Musk is always talking
about first principles and he thinks in
terms of building the system. I do think
some of it is personality and like what
you what's exciting to you to think
about like some people are very future
oriented and like thinking about what
the systems are and what that would lead
them to and and so on um or more
processoriented but there are a number
of questions that you can ask that can
help you figure out like what systems
you should be focused on you know so
like a couple of the ones I like one
question is can my current habits carry
me to my desired future so you have a
bunch of habits you're following right
now what what path are you on you know
can your current habits take you there?
And they could be either way. Like
sometimes the answer is yes. And what
you need is patience. You just need to
keep, you know, staying on the path. But
sometimes the answer is no. And then
obviously something needs to change. You
know, you're hoping for one outcome, but
then you're following a different
lifestyle.
>> So to want the outcome without the
lifestyle is to like torture yourself.
And what really matters is not do you
want the the result. Anybody would like
the result if you just hand it to them.
The question is do you want the
lifestyle? One of the little things I
try to do whenever I have a new business
project that I'm thinking about or
something I'm I'm excited about
potentially doing, the first question I
ask is how do I want to spend my days?
And so then you like draw a box and
inside that box, how can we make the
most money, reach the most people, make
the biggest impact, you know, make the
contribution that you want to make, but
not outside of it. And what happens a
lot of the time is people do that in
reverse. They start by asking how can we
make the most money or reach the most
people or make the biggest impact and
then they decide oh well this is what I
want to do but it's actually outside of
how they want to spend their days
>> and it's not going to work out well
because you know it goes back to our
point uh previously about is this fun
you know if the if they don't want to
spend their time that way you're just
grinding for a little while and
eventually it's not going to work.
That's the key for building systems that
really work is is this how you want to
spend your days. the person who wants to
live the lifestyle is much better
positioned to get the result.
>> You say that um there are multiple
problems with with goals as a I guess as
a rubric for thinking about what to do
or what to aim for. One of them is that
winners and losers have the same goals.
>> Everybody wants the results. Let's say
you have a 100 people apply for a job.
You got a new job opening.
>> Presumably, [clears throat]
every candidate has the goal of getting
the job. The goal is not the thing that
determines the outcome. So the person
who wins and the 99 people who lose,
they have the same goals. You look at
the Olympic Games, presumably any event,
everybody who's competing has the goal
of winning the Olympic medal, right? Of
winning the gold. So the goal is not the
thing that makes the difference. So
again, winners and losers have the same
goals. So if they have the same goals,
they cannot be the thing that make the
difference in their performance. It has
to be something else. Maybe having a
goal is part of it. Maybe it's
necessary, but it's not sufficient for
the outcome that you want. And for that,
what you need is a system. You need a
collection of habits that are going to
make the difference um and uh and
accumulate into a bigger outcome.
>> And you say goals restrict your
happiness.
>> There's some implicit promise internally
that once I get to this goal, then I'll
be happy. You know, once I write a New
York Times bestseller, then I'll feel
better about it. You know, once I
achieve this certain number on the
scale, then I'll be happy with my body.
Once I get to a million dollars in
revenue, then I'll be happy with the
business. And so you're kind of
constantly pushing happiness off to the
next milestone and thinking that once
you get there, then finally you'll be
satisfied. But I think in fact the
better way to do it is to fall in love
with the process, to fall in love with
the lifestyle, then you can be happy
along the way and still achieve the
goals as you go, still achieve the
milestones. For a long time, I wrestled
I had trouble with this question of do I
have to be dissatisfied if I want to be
driven?
>> Yeah.
>> Do you have to be dissatisfied to be
driven? Because to me, I felt like
there's where I'm at right now and
there's where I want to be. And so
there's this gap and there that gap is
dissatisfaction. That gap is, you know,
you're you want it to change. You want
it to close. And it's also what is
motivating and driving you is to try to
close that gap. And so the healthiest
answer, maybe the answer is yes, I don't
know. But uh the healthiest answer that
I've come up with is imagine like an
acorn falls from a tree. it manages to
take root, becomes a seedling and then a
sapling and eventually grows into this
mature oak tree. And at no point in that
process when it was just an acorn, it
wasn't criticizing itself for not being
a sapling. You know, it was just a
sapling, it wasn't criticizing itself
for not being an oak. Um, it wasn't
dissatisfied with where it was at. And
nobody came over and was criticizing it
for, "Oh, I can't believe you're not a
full-grown tree yet." But it kept
growing the whole time. So
simultaneously you have this thing where
it was both perfect at each stage that
it was at. Nothing was wrong and yet it
continued to grow. And the reason is
because that's just what an oak tree
does. That's what it is encoded to do.
It is encoded for growth. And so when I
look at myself, I think if I put myself
in the right position, that's how I feel
about it. You know, I I am perfectly
happy with where I'm at at each stage.
And yet I'm encoded to grow, right? I'm
encoded to keep going. And so I can both
be driven and be satisfied. I can both
be appreciative of the moment and still
moving forward. And I think that works
best when you find that thing. Sometimes
we call it your strengths. Sometimes we
might say it's what you're encoded to
do. Uh but when you find that thing that
is well aligned for you and if you do
find that, then you can have both of
those.
>> I love that. I love that. And I think
with with age and maturity, I've gotten
closer to being in that region where I'm
well aware nothing is going to make me
happier at all. like no accomplishment
future nothing's going to change
anything
>> but at the same time I'm still striving
and that does feel like a contradiction
to some degree it feels like how can
those two things be true at the same
time that you're striving for things
that you know won't really move the
needle in any any way the difference I
see between like me and something in
nature is that I the thing in nature
probably isn't comparing itself on
Instagram to like
>> everyone else and I understand humans to
be like comparison machines kind of how
we understand the value of things like I
understand the value of the steak on a
menu by the the cheap steak and the most
expensive one. So I think the middle one
is probably right. Do you think much
about comparison as a motivating or
demotivating force in this picture?
>> I think it can be very helpful and also
it can also be very harmful. So it's
just sort of a a sense of how you use
it. I tend to find it better if you
compare small things. So if you compare
marketing strategies or squat form or
you know writing style or you know the
first sentence of each chapter like how
do I have a good intro? If you compare
tactics, then that can be really helpful
for building skills and for developing
your ability. If you compare big things,
marriage, net worth, you know, things
like that, it's like that's just kind of
a recipe for ending up unhappy. Um
because they as the scale gets bigger,
things get more vague. There's so many
things involved in marriage and so you
know, or net worth or whatever. You you
just see one little slice and you are
trying to compare these two big things,
but you don't even know what the full
picture is. Uh, and so comparison is
like the teacher of skills when it's
applied narrowly, but it's the thief of
joy when it's applied broadly.
>> That makes sense. Yeah.
>> Early on, when you said that, you know,
ambitious people, they have lots of
aspirations, lots of habits they want to
start. I was thinking about myself and
thinking there's probably 30 habits that
I would like to acquire. I'd want to be
better at writing. I want to be a
runner. I want to be better at speaking.
I want to be a better friend and be more
um attentive with my friends and make
sure I text them on their birthdays and
sh you know
>> all of these new habits that I want to
pursue. How does one know which one to
aim for first? Is there a framework for
knowing?
>> Yeah, there there's some things that you
can do. I don't think um to your point
earlier about uh sometimes the riskiest
things just take a long time making a
decision. You know, if you maybe you
should just pick one and work on it and
then you can get on to the next one. But
I do think there's some level of
strategy which is a good place to start
is by asking yourself which habits are
upstream from other good things
happening. So for example I know that if
you were maybe the maybe the question to
start with is when you live a good day
when you feel dialed in when things are
like rolling along well for you what
tends to be part of that day sleep. you
know, okay, great. So, that's, you know,
I would say for me, sleep, sleep is
definitely one. I would say, uh, getting
my workout in. And usually reading and
writing are a part of it, but I think I
could just boil it down to reading. If I
just read like 10 pages, that often
sparks the writing. So, like to me,
reading is like the fuel for writing for
me. So, so I could say get a workout in
and read for 5 minutes or 10 minutes.
Those are the two things that are part
of a good day. And what happens is
they're upstream from a lot of other
good things happening. For example, if I
get the workout in, yeah, I feel good. I
get the benefits of the workout, but I
also have a post-workout high for like
an hour or two. So, I my focus and
concentration is better. I sleep better
at night because I got the workout in.
Now, I'm tired.
>> I tend to eat better when I work out.
It's when I'm not working out that I eat
terribly. That's why I don't know. It's
kind of like I don't want to waste it or
something. So, at no point was I trying
to build better focus habits or sleep
habits or nutrition habits. those just
came kind of a na as a natural
consequence of getting the workout in.
>> So what are those things that you do
that are upstream from other good things
happening? I think those are good like
anchor habits to start and focus on.
>> But if I could add another one for
myself, I would say it's a little bit of
time. It's really just time to think,
but it's it's time to reflect and
review. There's this interesting thing
that happens if you if you have a really
good work ethic, if you have a strong
work ethic and working hard has gotten
you far in life. It kind of becomes a
crutch. You know, you for for a long
time I was like, if I ever had a
problem, I was like, well, I'll just
work my way out of it, you know? I'll
just just work harder on it until I
figure it out. And that that's great.
That's really powerful for a lot of
things. But at some point it breaks, you
know, like you can maybe if you really
try maybe you can work 10% harder or 20%
harder, but there's some limit. But if
you work on the right thing, well, you
could get 100x the result or thousandx
the result. And so if you just keep your
head down and work hard, it's very
unlikely that you'll be spending your
time in the highest and best way.
>> And the only way to figure that out is
to have time to reflect and review. Time
to think, you know, so you need enough
time to think to figure out what should
I be focused on next. And so I think
that is it's almost reflection and
review is almost like the meta habit
that is above all others because if you
give yourself time to reflect and review
then you can troubleshoot your habits
and figure out how to adjust them. I was
thinking as you were saying that that
that that time to reflect and review is
actually also a review of are my current
systems moving me closer because when
when when you're talking about that I
was thinking of times in my life where I
was so close to like the picture and I
was so in the trenches doing the thing
that I hadn't come up to even say
actually is there a system I could put
in place to solve this problem over the
next five or 10 years like for example
is there a person I need to hire so
actually should I go into the hiring
process versus be in there fixing the
problem myself should I spend 10 hours
this week hire on hiring a candidate to
do this or should I be doing it but
sometimes you get so caught up in the
trenches when especially when things are
tough and and difficult and moving very
quickly that you don't review your
systems and also when you're talking
about systems I thought about how
systems sometimes expire.
>> Sure. Yeah.
>> Because things change.
>> That's a great point and I think this is
probably one of the most overlooked
things with habits. A lot of the time
when someone sits down and they want to
build a new habit, they don't say this,
but what they kind of assume is what it
would mean to be successful with this
habit is that I do it for the rest of my
life, you know, and that if at some
point I'm not doing it, then that must
mean that I failed or I quit on it.
>> But that's not how it is at all. Like
things have a season, you know, and so
habits have to change shape over time.
>> Let's take my um my writing habit for
example. I the habit that launched my
career was I wrote a new article every
Monday and Thursday and I did that for
three years. So the first three years
150 articles you know write twice a
week. That was a great habit. They were
like 2,000 word pieces or so. But then I
signed the book deal for Atomic Habits.
I didn't have the capacity to do that
and also write the book. So that had to
change. I wrote the book for like three
years and then the book came out and now
I write a newsletter once a week and
that's much shorter. But I kind of feel
like my writing habit is maintained that
whole time. It just changed shape. But
that's fine. It just needed to shift
based on the season. But I don't know,
people, they get so attached to one form
of a habit sometimes that they don't
realize that it's no longer serving
them.
>> And I think that's the one of the
trickier things to give up is a habit
that used to be good for you, that used
to work well, but no longer serves you
in your current season. It's I find that
I'm kind of a slow learner with that. I
guess parents can probably really relate
because they're forced to basically
change their goals and therefore their
systems would have to I mean you're a
father of three so you probably know
this much better than I do but have has
there been systems that you've had to
sort of
>> I think there's lots of uh inflection
points in life so having kids is one of
them uh starting a new job moving to a
new city you know it can be big stuff
like that I just talked to a mother who
her kids moved out so she's now an empty
neester you know she's like last 25
years I've been parenting all these kids
and now finally they're all out, but it
feels in some sense it almost feels like
a loss of identity. You know, you're
like, I I thought I was one thing and
now, you know, feels like things have
shifted. Um, but also it just signals an
inflection point in life and a new
season that you're in. And when your
seasons change, your habits often need
to change with it. And you talk about
this um four burners theory which I
guess dovetailes into what we're talking
about here where you you use this to
kind of think about what habits to
pursue in any season of life but also a
phrase that I've heard um so often
specifically from mothers on the show
comes to mind which is that you can't
have it all at the same time
>> and I've heard that I think four or five
times different mothers in particular
which is I mean says something about
society yeah have said to me that
they've had to realize that they can't
have it all at the same time
>> for sure. So this is not my concept.
This this idea that I came across. It's
called the four burners theory. And it
breaks life into these four burners on a
stove. So you have work and career as
one. You have family, friends, and then
personal health or you know uh yourself
basically as the other. The idea is that
for the burners to really be going well,
you can't have all four on at the same
time.
>> And burning stove.
>> The stove. Yeah. Yeah. The stove top. So
you you have you can choose you could
have three going on at kind of like a
mid level, but if you really want them
to do well, you can only have two on at
the same time. And you know, who knows?
I I don't know if it's true or not or
whatever, but it's an interesting idea.
And what it does is it gets you to
realize, yeah, a fundamental part of
life is trade-offs. And you cannot be
good at everything at the same time. So
this is true across projects. If you
choose try to do seven things at once,
spreading yourself thin in seven
different ways, very hard to be
excellent. For me, what I think about is
life has a series of seasons and life
has a series of sequences. So, let's say
it's not it's not always exactly 10
years, but let's say the big movements
in life are roughly 10-year buckets,
right? So, like for me, building my
first business, that was kind of like a
10-year thing and eventually led to the
launch of Atomic Habits. You maybe get
five or six of those in your adult life.
Some of those things make sense to do in
a different order than others. Like if
you want to travel the world and see a
bunch of places and party in a visa,
you're probably not going to do that in
your 60s, you know? Like I mean, you
can. There's no nobody's saying you
can't, but some things are probably
better sequenced in other, you know, in
other spots. Obviously, there's, you
know, especially for women, there's a
certain limit on if you want to have a
family, what decades that happens in.
So, yeah, it's just uh it's just a
matter of sequencing and prioritization.
If you look at the like tapestry of your
life, what do you want the big movements
to be and where do those seasons need to
slot in? Um, yeah, it's a it's a that
there is no right answer, but it's
interesting. As soon as you realize it's
a finite number, and as soon as you
realize that trade-offs are always going
to be a reality,
>> you have to deal with that in some way.
Um, I've decided that right now while my
kids are young, like I'm I'm going to
turn the career burner down. And that's
fine. It's not going to be how it was
for the last 10 years. But that's okay
because they're only five once, you
know? They're only turning six once.
They only go to second grade once. And I
I want to be there for all that. So, um,
there are always trade-offs.
>> I think that that sequence point is
super super interesting. It got me
thinking because you're right, there are
sort of some constraints whether they're
biological constraints where in the case
of your kids like just natural
constraints that mean this this season
can only happen now here, right?
>> Yeah. There's also some things like um,
you know, both of us are fairly young
entrepreneurs. I'm so glad that I
started a business in my 20s rather than
my 50s. Um, doesn't mean you can't do it
in your 50s. There's no nobody's saying
you can't. It's just that it makes
things a lot easier for the next decade.
You know, it's easier for me to be there
for my kids now because I have control
of my time because I did the business
part in the previous decade. And so take
the risks.
>> Yeah. And and that doesn't mean it's
always going to work out or whatever. It
doesn't mean that you're going to be
able to perfectly plan it all, but you
just see how the sequences can um can
stack up in that way.
>> And how important do you think when
we're talking about habits, do you think
repetition is? because there's so many
of these sort of well-known concepts or
frameworks in habit formation. One of
them is that habits take roughly 66
days. One of them is that it's about
repetition. Does repetition really
matter?
>> It definitely does. I mean, repetition
is how habits form. Uh the 66 days
number comes from one study that came
out that found that on average it took
about 66 days to build a habit. If you
look at the study, the range is pretty
wide. So, if you pick something really
simple like drinking a glass of water um
at lunch each day, that might only take
two or three weeks to form. If you look
at something more complicated like um
going for a run after work every day,
that might take seven or eight or nine
months to form. And so, I don't know
that 66 days really tells you anything.
It doesn't it doesn't tell you that this
is how long it's going to take for your
habit to stick. I mean, it the range is
wide. Sometimes when people ask me how
long does it take to form a habit, my
answer is forever. Because if you stop
doing it, then it's no longer a habit.
And what I'm kind of getting at with
that is that habits are not a finish
line to be crossed. They're a lifestyle
to be lived, you know? And so we
approach our habits as if it's a finish
line. Oh, let me do this 30-day cleanse
and then I'll be healthy. Let me do this
90-day sprint and then the product will
be shipped. I won't have to worry about
it anymore, you know? And it's like most
things in life, especially the big
important things, they're endless.
They're endless battles, you know. So,
just because you went to the gym
yesterday earns you no bo bonus points
for tomorrow. Like, you still have to
show up tomorrow. Just because you were
a good spouse yesterday earns you no
bonus points for tomorrow. You still
have to be loving and caring again. Um,
and so all the things that really matter
are endless battles. And it's not about
crossing a finish line. It's about
living that kind of lifestyle. And so,
yes, it is true that repetition matters.
And yes, it is true that the habits will
become more seamless and automatic and
maybe a little less effortful as you
repeat them more, but that doesn't mean
that you'll never have to think about
them or, you know, worry about them
again.
>> Do you think much about what's going on
in the brain when repetition occurs?
Like, what is it that's making it
easier? If I', if I've been on a on a
roll with the gym, I've been going for
60 days in a row. Why does it feel
easier on day 61?
That's a tricky question because um if
you were to talk to an academic and they
would tell you like a habit is this
automatic non-concious behavior. Really
quick simple things like brushing your
teeth, tying your shoes, every time you
pick up a pair of barbecue tongs, you
got to tap them together twice, you
know, like stuff that you don't even
really think about. Okay, that's actual
habitual behavior. But if I were to ask
you, what are some habits you're trying
to build? you would say, "I'm trying to
go to the gym four days a week or I'm
trying to write every morning or I'm
trying to meditate, you know, five days
a week or whatever." And I know what you
mean when you say that. You mean I want
it to be this routine, this practice
that I do consistently. But like writing
every day is never going to be mindless
the way that brushing your teeth is. You
know, going to the gym is not going to
be automatic the way that tying your
shoes might be. And so the things that
we there's a little bit of sloppiness in
the word habits and how we use it in
life. It's not they're not automatic
mindless routines most of the time. Most
of the things that we want to be habits
are not like reflexes. They're routines
and rituals that we do consistently.
>> So having said that, it is true that
after you've gone to the gym for a month
or two, it does start to get easier. And
I think there's a number of forces that
kind of work in your favor there. One is
you figured a lot out about uh what it
takes to get into the gym. What time am
I going? What route do I take? How do I
pack my bag? Do I need to bring a water
bottle or is there a water fountain at
the gym? Like all those sorts of things
are little one-time costs that you got
to figure out early on that once you're
into a pattern, you already know them.
>> You know, the water bottle thing sounds
like a small thing. I heard from someone
who said, "I always forget to bring my
water bottle and they don't have water
fountains at this gym." So like I I
sometimes I skip the workout because of
that. You know, it's like it's
remarkable how little friction it takes
to pull us off course. Mhm.
>> And so figuring out all of those things
is something that once you're a month or
two in, you've crossed all you've, you
know, you've fought all those battles
and now you know how to do it. So that
makes it easier. The other thing is you
start to build friendships, start to
build connections, you start to know the
people there, you feel comfortable
there. There's this concept Steven
Presfield talks about where u you know
if you have a wolf and it's roaming
around uh eventually it starts to feel
like it has its territory and early on
in a process a creative process writing
a book or whatever you go into the
office the first time to write the first
chapter of the book and you kind of feel
uncomfortable it feels like it's not you
yet you go to the gym on the first day
you feel like people are judging you do
I look stupid I don't know how to do
this but after a while it becomes your
territory it's just like the wolf it
starts to feel like your home court and
so That familiarity I think also makes
it much easier to stick to the habits,
you know, once you start to feel
comfortable there and that takes a
little bit of time. And then the last
piece is identity. The more that you
start to follow this habit, the more you
repeat a habit, the more you reinforce
being that type of person, the more you
start to have that element of your
story. I think this is one of the most
important things for building habits and
getting habits to stick, which is how
your habits reinforce your desired
identity. We often start by asking what
do I wish to achieve? But I think what
we really should start with is who do I
wish to become? What are my actions
reinforcing? What are my actions taking
me closer toward? In a sense, every
action you take is like a vote for the
type of person you wish to become. So,
no, doing one push-up does not transform
your body, but it does cast a vote for
I'm the type of person who doesn't miss
workouts. And no, writing one sentence
does not finish a novel, but it does
cast a vote for I'm a writer. And no,
sending one bit of positive feedback
does not make you like the world's best
leader, but it does cast a vote for I'm
the type of leader who cares about their
teammates. And individually, those are
small things, but collectively you build
up this body of evidence for being that
kind of person.
>> It's a little bit [clears throat]
different than what you often hear. Like
you often hear people say something like
um fake it till you make it.
>> And I don't necessarily have anything
wrong with fake it till you make it.
Like it's um asking you to believe
something positive about yourself. But
behavior and beliefs are a two-way
street. And so what you believe
influences the actions you will take.
And the actions you take also influences
what you will believe. And my
encouragement, my suggestion is to start
with the action. To let the behavior
lead the way. To make one sales call or
meditate for one minute or do one
push-up and let that in that moment be
evidence that you were that type of
person. You know, if you go outside
today and you shoot a basketball for
five minutes, you don't instantly think,
"Oh, I'm a basketball player." But if
you do it every day for next three
months or six months or a year, at some
point you cross this invisible threshold
where you have to admit, I guess playing
basketball is like kind of an important
part of who I am. You know, I guess it's
part of my identity. And once you adopt
a habit as part of your story, once it
becomes part of how you see yourself,
it's not just like I need to go for a
run. It's like I am a runner, you know,
I go I do this because this is part of
who I am. Then you'll fight to maintain
the habit, right? Like then then it
becomes easier for it to stick. And so
the connection between habits and
identity I think is ultimately how you
really get habits to stick for the long
run.
>> It reminds me of a study I was reading
recently that said if you speak to
someone in terms of giving them an
identity versus
using a word as an adjective the
behavior occurs. So an example would be
if I you do something for me and I say
do you know what James you are a kind
person
>> in the studies people become more kind.
But if I say that was kind
>> or that action was kind people are less
kind. So if I if I can give you feedback
that embodies your identity, then you're
more like likely for that behavior to
occur. So with my team, and this is
maybe giving a bit of the game away,
>> I will often refer to them as an
identity. I will say you are an
innovator.
>> You are an experimental because from the
studies I've read that increases the
probability that they embody that
identity.
>> There's another study that um did it for
voting. So people were more likely to go
and vote if you said like I am a voter.
You got them to identify as I'm a voter
rather than are you voting today? Um,
and so same same thing. There's an
example in Atomic Habits I talk about.
Imagine two people who are trying to
quit smoking, you know, and so the first
person gets offered a cigarette and they
say, "Oh, no thanks. I'm trying not to
smoke." Um, and the second person gets
offered and they say, "Oh, no thanks.
I'm not a smoker." And so the first
person is trying to resist something
that they still see themselves as, but
the second person no longer sees
themselves as the type of person who
smokes. And um yeah, some of the
evidence and research suggests that once
you adopt those identities, it's it's
easier for you to stick to the behavior.
>> Reminds me of the research from Leon
Festinger, the guy that came up with the
term cognitive dissonance.
>> The way that I understand the concept of
cognitive dissonance is that if I have a
perceived identity of myself and
something external threatens that or
challenges it, we're not good at living
in contradiction. I'm not good at So,
for example, I'm a an accountant right
now and I hear that AI is doing
accountancy work amazingly well. Now,
I've invested 10 years in that
accountancy degree. I see myself as a
great accountant.
My my my sort of initial reaction will
probably be to either dismiss my current
identity as a great accountant that
that's going to have a great career in
the future or to dismiss the AI. And he
talks, well, people that have studied
his work talk about how we're very poor
at being able to hold two contradictory
things to be true at the same time. So,
um we tend to protect our identity.
>> Yes. Um, there's something incredibly
powerful about this that also ties into
habits, which is that a lot of our
identity, not not the whole thing, but
large portions of our identity are tied
to our relationships. You know, I'm a
father, I'm a, you know, husband, I'm a,
you know, and so like it's the
connection that we have with others. Our
social bonds influence the picture that
we have of ourselves.
>> This is something that widely influences
our habits, you know. So, we are all
part of multiple groups. Sometimes that
group is large, like what it means to be
American or what it means to be British.
Sometimes that group is small, like what
it means to be a neighbor on your street
or a member of this family or a member
at the local CrossFit gym. But all of
the groups that you belong to, large and
small, have a set of shared expectations
for how you act. Have a set of social
norms for what you do in that group. And
when your habits go with the grain of
the expectations of the group, they're
pretty attractive. You know, like you
want to stick to them. You get praised
and rewarded for it. You fit in. And
when they go against the grain of the
expectations of the group, they're kind
of unattractive. You get criticized and
it doesn't feel good. And so if people
have to choose between, I have habits
that um I want, but I'm cast out, I'm
ostracized, I'm criticized, or I have
habits that I don't really love, but I
fit in, I belong, I'm part of something.
Most of the time, the desire to belong
overpowers the desire to improve. And so
you want to do something different, but
you also know you're going to be heavily
criticized for it or you're going to at
least add friction to your
relationships. And we don't want to live
with that dissonance. That dissonance of
I could have this, but I also create
friction here. One of the lessons I
think one of the big takeaways if you
want to build better habits and get
habits to stick particularly for the
long run is you want to join groups
where your desired behavior is the
normal behavior. join groups where you
can rise together, where the people that
you're surrounded by have the type of
habits that you want to have.
>> It reminds me of this um this thing that
appeared in Jeff Bezos's shareholder
letter about resisting the equilibrium.
>> H I I didn't know about this. Go ahead.
>> So, in Jeff Bezos's shareholder letter,
he writes to shareholders that when
referring to Amazon's ability and desire
and need to innovate through the future,
he says he makes a comparison to Richard
Dawkins book called the I think it's a
blind clock maker. Uh yeah the yeah
blind watchman
>> blind watchman. Yeah yeah yeah yeah and
says that essentially all living
organisms live in this constant battle
to resist their equilibrium and actually
death itself is when we become our
environment because right now me and you
have huge amount of energy expenditure
to be different from our environment in
terms of temperature in terms of acidity
etc. And he he's making the comparison
which sounded a lot what like what you
just said that if you want to that all
living organisms are in this constant
battle to be different from our
environment. Um and that the more
different our environment is the harder
the fight. So if I go to the desert my
body has to put put out even more energy
to be a different temperature to be a
different sort of acidity than the
environment. But if I want to make my
life easier and make that fight easier,
then go into an environment where my
environment is the same as my internal
my internal state.
>> That's great. The I think that punchline
of the more different your environment
is from the habits that you want to
build or from whatever equilibrium
you're trying to achieve, the harder you
will have to fight to maintain.
>> And that is a fight that you can do for
I don't know a day, a week, a month, but
it's some limited amount of time. At
some point it just is draining to try to
grind against the environment all the
time. Sometimes I view environment both
physical and social almost like a form
of gravity. You know, like the the
physical environment that we're in right
now, okay, that's always nudging you in
certain directions. Like I'm I'm sitting
in this chair right now talking to you.
I could be sitting anywhere else, but I
would have to sit on the floor, right?
The the environment of the chair is
ushering me to this spot. It's almost
like a form of gravity pulling me here
rather than getting me to go somewhere
else. When we leave this room, if I
wanted, I could try to do something
crazy and break through a wall or climb
through the ceiling or whatever, but I'm
going to go through the door because
that's where the environment is
naturally nudging me toward. It's the
where that behavior happens easily. And
all of our spaces are like that. You're
always being kind of pulled toward what
is natural and easy and consistent in
that environment. So, how can you prime
your environment to make those the
things you want to do? That's for
physical environment. Social environment
is the same. You know, it's all you're
always kind of being pulled toward what
the behaviors are that are natural
there. What are the social norms? What
are the things that people get praised
and rewarded for? What are what is the
culture typically calling you to do? And
that's where I think the answer is you
want to surround yourself with groups
who have the behaviors you want to have.
Join groups where your desired behavior
is normal. If it's normal in that group,
then you can rise together. So, I mean
that that must mean getting rid of
certain people in one's life. And
sometimes those people are hard to get
rid of because their families, their
moms, their dads.
>> Sure. And I, you know, I'm a little uh
sometimes you hear people say things
like, "Fire your friends," you know, or
whatever. Like, and I I I'm not I'm not
all the way there. Uh I I think that
yes, it is true. Sometimes you have um
an extreme circumstance where it's a
particularly toxic person or something
like that. And yeah, like you know, you
probably maybe should not be around them
and that those can lead to very hard
decisions. But I would say for the
majority of life and the majority of
your relationships, what we're really
talking about here is not getting rid of
relationships. We're talking about
finding specific places where that habit
can thrive. So here are some examples.
There's a number of studies that have
shown that it tends to be easier to
build a new habit in a new environment.
So for example, if you Well, first let
me back up. There's an interesting way
to define what a habit is, which is that
it is a behavior that is tied to a
particular context. So, for example,
your habit of watching Netflix might be
tied to the context of your couch at 7
p.m. And whenever you walk into your
living room and you're by your couch and
it's in the evening, you're kind of
naturally being pulled toward picking up
the remote and doing that because that's
the context the habit happens in. So, if
you want to build a new habit, and
again, these studies have found that it
tends to be easier to build a new habit
in a new environment. Well, let's say
you want to start a habit of journaling.
Well, you walk into your living room in
the evening and you sit down on the
couch and you're like, I'm going to
start journaling. But you're naturally,
you know, your brain is kind of like,
well, it's time to pick up the remote
and turn on the TV. That doesn't always
mean that you need a brand new space,
like a new building or a new room to do
every habit in. But you could do
something like you could get a chair and
put it in the corner of the room and
that becomes the journaling chair and
the only thing that you do when you sit
in that chair is you journal for five
minutes. So now you have a new context
that is tied to the behavior that you
want to perform. And in the social
sense, so this is what we were talking
about previously. You want to be able to
create a space that is a safe place for
that envir for that habit to live or for
that habit to thrive. say um sometimes
there those spaces are ready made like
uh let's say you want to do yoga four
days a week but you look around your
family or your friends in your apartment
that you're living nobody else is
interested they don't want to do it too
you do it in the living room you kind of
get made fun of or you're stepping on
other people's space they're like I'm
trying to do stuff in here too you know
it's just kind of inconvenient well you
can go to a yoga studio and that's a
place where for that hour you can be
surrounded by a group where your desired
behavior is normal you don't have to
fire any of your friends um and you can
just go to the place where that happens
that can thrive. And I think each habit
likes to have that. It likes to have
somewhere where it can exist in a way
that it's going to be supported or in a
way where the environment makes it easy.
Sometimes the environment is readyade
like that. Other times it's not. So for
me, one of the most useful things that I
did in my entrepreneurial career, I had
I had no entrepreneurs in my family, no
authors. So I had this thing that I kind
of wanted to do, but I I didn't have
anybody close to me that I could like
look to. first six months that I was an
entrepreneur, I sent like 300 cold
emails just to other people that were
like a year or two ahead of me. Someone
who seemed like you're actually doing
this thing where, you know, you've got
this online audience and you're you're
writing about stuff you like. Um maybe
30 people got back to me. I did like a
little, you know, Zoom call or whatever
and, you know, we chatted and connected
and then I met some of them at a
conference like six months later. So I
was six months in. I knew like maybe 10
people that I had met in person and I
had like 30 that I had reached out to.
So now it feels like okay at least I
know a couple people who have done this
thing and I started hosting these
retreats every once or twice a year I'd
get six or eight authors together and
I'd say let's just rent an Airbnb. We'll
split the cost and we can talk about how
to build an audience and how to grow
your you know email list and how to
write a book and launch it and you know
all the stuff that we were kind of
focused on. It was almost always like
the best six month uh best weekend of my
year. Um because I would have six months
worth of stuff that I need to execute on
after that was done.
>> That's kind of like going to a yoga
studio for yoga, but you had to create
the space. I was always worried that I
was going to look like some dork, you
know, and like invite everybody and they
would all say no or whatever. But
everybody wants the same thing. You
know, they're all waiting for somebody
to create the space for like-minded
people to get together. So sometimes you
need enough courage to create the space
yourself. But the punch line is the
same, which is you're trying to surround
yourself with people where your desired
behavior is the normal behavior.
I've had so many founders speak to me
and say, "Why didn't this particular ad
that I ran on this platform work for
me?" Maybe the copy wasn't good. The
creative wasn't strong. But usually the
problem is they're not having the right
conversation because that ad never
reached the right person. And if you're
in B2B marketing, that is much of the
game. And this is where LinkedIn ads
solves that problem for you. Their
targeting is ridiculously specific. You
can target by job title, seniority,
company size, industry, and even
someone's skill set. And their network
includes over a billion professionals.
About 130 million of them are decision
makers. So when you use LinkedIn ads,
you're putting your brand in front of
the right people. And LinkedIn ads also
drive the highest B2B return on ad spend
across all ad networks in my experience.
If you want to give them a try, head
over to linkedin.com/diary.
And when you spend $250 on your first
LinkedIn ads campaign, you'll get an
extra $250 credit from me for the next
one. That's linkedin.com/diary.
Terms and conditions apply.
I'm thinking about all the people that
um are currently sat in a in a job that
they don't like. They're sat in the a
job in the middle of a big city. They're
miserable. They want to go do something
else. They want to go be an author. They
want to go follow in your footsteps.
They want to build a business in a media
business for example, but they're so far
away from that. They're held in place by
their parents' expectations. They're
held in place by a mortgage and all the
things that you know, life when they get
home every day. They're tired. Really,
really tired. So, it's remained a dream.
You must have so many of those people
that write to you that message you
>> [snorts]
>> um because of what you've you've
produced and because of the the content
that you make. What do you say to those
people?
Where where does one one such person
start?
>> One is I don't think it serves you in
any way to just like kind of wallow in
how hard it is or to talk about how
tough talking complaining about how hard
it is just makes it harder,
>> you know?
>> So the the act of complaining makes a
bad situation worse. The act of
emphasizing the things that are going
well or trying to take it's kind of this
endless game of trying to take your
current advantages and gain new
advantages. So like early on most people
don't have many advantages. Like I
didn't know anybody in the industry. I
didn't have any money. I didn't have any
experience. But the one advantage that I
did have was I had time. And so I could
use that time to try to gain new
advantages. So in my case, I used the
time to write two articles a week. And I
did that for two years. I did like kind
of freelance gigs on the side to pay the
bills and stuff. And eventually that's
how I built the audience. And then once
I had the audience two years later, then
I I had a new advantage, right? I not
only had time, I also had an email list.
Now I can go from there and I could get
a book deal and then I have a new
advantage. I have a book deal and then
you know you just kind of like
continually use your current advantages
to gain new advantages.
>> And um I just talked about this for
about 20 seconds. That was about seven
years of my life that the span of all
that, right? It goes it goes slower than
what you want. But um it's kind of just
that that endless game.
>> It goes slower than you would want.
Makes me think about this whole uh idea
of being 1% better every day.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> What are the most sort of pertinent
parts of of understanding that graph?
>> Two things stand out. All right. So,
first is this is this charts showing
what this is showing is if you get 1%
better each day for a year. Okay? So,
1.01 to the 365th power, you get 37
times better by the end of the year.
Right? So, that's this curve. If you get
1% worse, 0.99 to the 3665th power, you
drive yourself almost all the way down
zero. Now a chart like this is just
compound interest, right? This is just a
compounding curve. And real life is not
exactly like compound interest. You
know, your habits are not exactly like
this mathematical formula. But I think
this chart does a good job of
encapsulating what the process of
behavior change feels like. You know
what it's like to try to get a little
bit better each day because two things
are true. These are the two things that
stand out. First, any compounding curve,
the hallmark of any compounding process
is all the greatest returns are delayed.
Right? you are 80% of the way through
this curve before it really starts to
take off. So all the greatest returns
are delayed. The early stuff doesn't
feel that impressive. The second is the
on day one the separation between 0.99
and 1.01 is very small, right? 1% better
or 1% worse is very minor.
>> So on any given day, it's very easy to
dismiss, you know, what is the
difference between eating something
healthy for lunch or eating something
unhealthy. Today, basically nothing.
Your body looks the same in the mirror
at the end of the night. The scale
hasn't changed. You know, there's no
evidence. What is the difference between
the person who reads for 10 minutes
today and the person who doesn't
basically nothing to reading for 10
minutes does not make you a genius. But
the person who always goes to bed a
little bit smarter than they were when
they woke up. The person who always
takes a little bit of time each day to
learn something new. Yeah. Two or five
or 10 years later, like that's a
meaningful difference in wisdom and
insight. And so you see this same
pattern again and again throughout life,
which is what starts out small and it's
pretty insignificant, easy to dismiss on
a daily basis, it compounds, it
multiplies, it improves over time. And
so the effects of your habits are
delayed. Time will magnify whatever you
feed it. So if you have good habits,
time becomes your ally. And every day
that goes by, you put yourself in a
stronger position. If you have bad
habits, time becomes your enemy. And
every day that goes by, you dig the hole
a little bit deeper. And so the real
lesson of a chart like this, the real
lesson of getting 1% better every day is
not to get wrapped up in the number.
It's not like, oh, is it a 1%
improvement or 1.6% or whatever. It's
not about that. It's an attitude. It's
an approach. It's a focus, an emphasis
on trajectory rather than position.
>> You know, there's a lot of discussion
about position in life. How much money's
in my bank account? What's the number on
the scale? What's the stock price? What
are the quarterly earnings? We have all
these measurements and metrics for
assessing our current position. And then
if the position isn't what we want it to
be, we get frustrated or we feel guilty
or we judge ourselves or we get annoyed
or whatever. And what I'm encouraging is
to say, listen, just for a minute, let's
stop worrying so much about our current
position and instead focus a little bit
more on our current trajectory. Am I
getting 1% better or 1% worse? Is the
arrow pointed up and to the right or
have we flatlined? So if you're on a
good trajectory, all you need is time.
[clears throat]
>> This is this has almost become a
religious belief. I because I think for
everything you've said, it has to become
a religious belief because the results
are hard to see in the near term. But um
it is most certainly a religious belief
in our team.
>> I have multiple readers who got tattoos
of it, which I was not expecting. I drew
this on an index card and now it's on
somebody's body. [laughter]
>> Yeah, that was that was definitely
surprising. And it needs that religion
because that first part where you you're
doing something and there's no progress,
there's no evidence of progress.
>> There is something tricky about this
that I think is important. So we all we
all have made this mistake before which
is you can make 1% improvements that
accumulate and you can make 1%
improvements that evaporate. Right? You
can spend your time time on trivial
stuff meaningful. You know see it can be
meaningful small changes or it can be
meaningless small changes. And so how do
you decide the difference between the
two? That's kind of tricky and I I don't
know that you can always get it
perfectly right, but to me the dividing
line is does this action accumulate into
something larger or not? You know, you
can you can spend your time doing all
small stuff, whatever day in and day
out, but are you building towards
something bigger?
>> And so, in a lot of ways, I think the
two time frames that matter most in life
are 10 years and one hour.
>> You know, 10 years is just shorthand for
like what's the big meaningful stuff
you're working toward. You think about
most of the stuff that people really
care, the meaningful movements in life,
most of them are multi-year things, you
know, build a business that you're proud
of, raising a successful family, you
know, having a a happy marriage, getting
in the best shape of your life, what
whatever it is, contributing to some
cause that you care about, like they're
usually big multi-year, sometimes
multi-deade things. So 10 years is
shorthand for that. But if you can do
one thing each day that's going to serve
you well in 10 years, if you can find
one hour sometime today to do something
that's going to pay off in a decade, you
usually don't even need to wait 10 years
for it to really start to show up. You
know, usually you get two or three or
four years into that and you're like,
"Wow, I can't believe how this stuff's
accumulating already." And it makes me
think again about your idea of systems
versus goals because the most
exceptional founders I know they'll
think about what can I do in the next
hour so that in 10 years time we're in a
different place which again it sounds
I've said this a few times but one of
the most important things in business I
mean the definition of the word company
is hiring. So most I think all nearly
all problems I face in business are a
people problem.
>> It's like a people mistake that I have
or haven't you know made yet. So the
further I've got in my career, I've
started to think that actually most of
my the next hour of my life should be
working on people because that corrects
what happens in 10 years time. Like if
we want to go want my company to go
public in 10 years time, in the next
hour I should really be thinking about a
hiring process which will find the CFO
which will build the business.
>> And here you are talking to me,
>> right? No, but I'm learning. But and I'm
going to go take it out and I'm going to
go. No, but it's really it's really
useful speaking to you about this
because it's given me the wording to
which will create memorability which
will create the repetitions and the
habits if you know what I'm saying. Is
it on straight? And I I wasn't thinking
in terms of systems and goals. I was I I
always refer to it with people. I say
what's furthest upstream.
>> Yeah.
>> And this can also be what we're saying
about sleep. And I I see hiring for
example in business or actually
generally in your personal life
selecting people as the single most
important factor to everything that
happens downstream.
>> Relationships in general are probably
there it's obvious to everybody that
they matter and yet they still are
probably perpetually undervalued. Yeah.
>> So uh it's true in a business sense
which is what you're talking about here.
Like almost every business problem at
some level could be a people problem or
there's a person who could unlock it and
solve that problem. It's true in a
personal sense. the most important
decision you probably will make is like
whether or who you get married to. Uh
that you know that will dramatically
shape your life.
>> It's also true in like a just a luck
business life sense which is that
there is no such thing as an opportunity
that is not tied to a person, right?
Like opportunities come through people.
And so when you say, "Oh, I wish I could
just like have some good luck or I wish
I could like catch my lucky break." what
you're probably talking about is there's
a person who carries that opportunity
with them that you need to interface
with or get to know and so in all of
these ways relationships dramatically
shape our lives and uh yeah people
people are probably the most important
thing in that sense
>> I think with with with age that becomes
more apparent for most people it becomes
more most apparent that the best
decisions I've made in my life were
people and the worst decisions I made in
my life were also [laughter] people
>> but we don't think about that we think
I'll work Saturday and Sunday in the I
I'll have some great idea. If I read a
book, I'll have some great idea which
will make me lucky and successful.
Whereas um with time, I realize that the
smart work versus the hard work is
focusing much more on on people. How how
do you how does your work dovetail into
things like um self-esteem and
confidence and because everybody wants
to build confidence and for some people
they're in a bit of a downward
reinforcing confidence spiral which I
guess would look something like this.
you know, something happened in their
life, so they're less likely to raise
their hand or to step outside of their
zone zone of comfort. And even when and
if they do, they interpret it
negatively, and that knocks their
confidence. They see it, they're wearing
sunglasses that interpret the things
that are happening as negative, and
they're in this sort of downward
compounding spiral.
>> Mhm.
>> And there's other people that seem to be
going the other way. First is um I had a
high school basketball coach that told
me, "Confidence is just displayed
ability." And what he meant was if you
want to feel more confident about like
your ability to make a free throw, go
out there and shoot for an hour and once
you knock down 10 in a row, you're going
to feel a lot better about it. And so
what you realize, this is true for
everything, which is once you have
started to display your ability in any
given area, you know, give a successful
speech or, you know, make a nice
presentation for work or whatever it is,
you feel better about it. And so what
you realize is you need reps. You know,
you need practice. Whatever the thing
is, you need you need enough repetition
to start to learn how to do the thing.
And so this is why sometimes I'll say
like motivation comes after starting,
not before. We think we need motivation
to get started, but in fact, you should
try to scale it down and make it so easy
that you'll do it even if you don't feel
that motivated about it and start get
some reps in and then once you've get
got and then once you have performed the
repetitions, you start to build up some
confidence because you know that you
have some evidence that you can do it.
So confidence is displayed ability.
Let's try to scale it down, make it
easy, start to display our ability, and
then the confidence comes as a side
effect. The second thing though, and
this this might even be the more
important piece. You mentioned this idea
of someone who interprets things in a
negative frame. You know, they they get
in the caught in this like downward
spiral. They see like evidence of things
working against them or the world is
tilted against them or like they're
emphasizing the pieces of the story that
aren't serving them that well. I had so
I played baseball for a long time. I
played through college. Um, and when I
was younger, uh, I was 10, 12, 14, after
each season, we would do this thing. My
dad and I would go out and sit on the
back deck and we would talk about like
the wins, the good parts of the of the,
you know, the biggest games that our
team won or like my best plays from the
year or just like things that I got
better at from the season before. And I
was never the best player on any team
that I was on. But you finish each
season with a sense of positivity, a
sense of confidence, this feeling of
like momentum going into the next year.
And I think I played for a long time
partially because of that, you know,
like we were it was a practice of
emphasizing your wins. And so I think
that's an interesting thing that like
more people should try is when you look
back on your last year, what are some of
the wins that you've had? And try to use
that, you know, tell yourself that
story, emphasize that story and use that
to move into the next moment. I was
talking recently. So, I have this I have
this publishing company that I
co-founded, Author's Equity, and we're
publishing this book from this guy named
Brandon Webb, who is a former Navy Seal.
He uh trained the Navy Seal sniper unit
in mental performance. And so, he he
would teach them all kinds of things. I
was talking to him about the book and
some of the strategies and I was trying
to learn like what they would do. And
two things stood out to me. The first
thing he said is a positive outlook no
matter the scenario. So the first thing
we train them on is positive outlook no
matter what situation or scenario
they're in. The second thing is
visualizing things going well. Okay. So
so one time a sniper came up to him and
said what's a good score on this uh
course like they would give them these
little courses to test like you know
they have to make eight or 10 or 12
different shots or whatever. And he said
a good score is 100%. [laughter] And he
was like now in reality almost nobody
gets 100%. Um, but I wanted to set that
standard, right? To set that outcome in
their mind as the thing that they were
shooting for. And he had two guys he was
training. One of them got a 96, one of
them got 100. Um, anyway, the point is
that
in life, there are always things that go
well and things that go poorly. There
will always be days that things are
stacked against you and days when things
seem to go your way. And the question
is, which story are you telling
yourself? You know, which version of the
events are you emphasizing? Now, I'm not
suggesting that you should like ignore
reality. You know, if there's a problem
that needs to be addressed, then you
still need to address it. But as long as
you're not re ignoring reality, I feel
like the only thing that makes sense is
to emphasize the empowering version. You
know, to emphasize the wins, to sit down
and reflect on what you've done and
think about what the wins were and how
that feeds into your momentum going
forward and to visualize the next step
and how it's going to go well. It
reminds me of um something Sir David
Brford said to me who I know is the
prominent in the first chapter of your
book.
>> Um he was talking a lot about 1% gains
etc. And he says the thing that he
doesn't get to talk about enough is the
psychological momentum that's created
from
accomplishing these 1% gains and
celebrating them amongst the team. He
said to me that when he was in the
British cycling team and he went into
there and they were down and out and
depressed and kind of being ridiculed
for being this terrible team. He goes,
"We started, you know, stacking up the
1%s, etc." And the crazy thing that
happened is we started to quote feel
like we were going somewhere and people
stopped leaving the bike shop at 5:00
p.m. and started staying till 2:00 a.m.
because they felt like they were going
somewhere. It dovetails into your point
about progress, but also just the power
of being intentional about um
celebrating those wins and the
psychological momentum it creates in a
group of people and yourself.
>> That's great. I think you do need to be
a little bit more intentional about it
in the real world. So if you look if you
look at some of the most habit forming
technologies or some of the most habit
forming things like let's take video
games for example in a video game there
are continual constant forms of
progress. So your score is increasing in
like the top corner of the screen
whenever you pick up a weapon or a ruby
or a gem or whatever it's like a little
jingle or chime or some musical note.
Even the pitterpatter of footsteps as
you like run through the level is a
signal that you're making progress that
you're moving forward that you're going
somewhere. And so if you compare all of
that immediate feedback that you're
getting like all in the same moment when
you're playing this level
>> and then you walk outside and you think
about most of the things you're working
on in real life, you're like this
committee's been meeting every Friday
for six months. We still haven't shipped
this feature, you know, like I've been
running every day for the last month and
I still don't see a change in my body.
And so it's very hard to compare the
digital world and all the progress that
we get there through our screens to the
physical world and the habits that we're
trying to build and foster in our lives
and businesses.
>> And I think that's one reason why it is
nice to be more intentional about it to
try to think about what are the 1%
improvements or the small gains that we
can make today and then celebrating
those wins so that you have some feeling
of progress there because in the real
world progress is often delayed. You
know, my parents like to swim. Well, if
they were swimming for the change that
they're going to see in their body, it
takes two years, you know, like they the
problem is they jump into the water and
their body looks exactly the same when
they get out, right? And so, you need
something in the moment that gives you
some signal of progress. They use a
habit tracker. So, they have like a
little template where they just put a
little X on that day. But, you need
something that visualizes your progress,
that gives you some signal that you're
moving forward. I was reminded then of
the Harvard Business Review did the
study where they asked people what their
best day in work was and they asked them
to keep work diaries. I think it was
about a thousand people and the majority
of people pointed at a day in their work
diary in that week where they had a
feeling of progress even if it was tiny
>> as and this goes to your point about
making it fun as well. So highlighting
one's progress and celebrating it makes
it fun but also that psychological
momentum. And then also you can do this
stuff you can do the 1% better every
day. you put yourself in a position to
experience the feeling of progress if
you scale your habits down. So let's say
sometimes there in chemistry there's
this com um there's this concept of
activation energy how much energy it
takes to activate a reaction.
>> So you know if the activation energy is
high you have to put a lot of heat or a
lot of energy into the reaction to make
it occur.
>> I think habits kind of have an
activation energy too. So like let's say
that your habit is to do a 100 push-ups
a day. the activation energy for that's
kind of high on the first day when
you're really pumped about it. Maybe
you're doing sets of 10 all throughout
the day and you get to 100 and you feel
really good. Maybe you can do that for a
couple days or a week or whatever, you
know. Um but at some point you get to a
day where you're tired or you had a lot
to do at work or whatever and then you
turn around it's 9:30 and you're like, I
need to go to bed soon. Do I feel like
doing 100 push-ups? Um and then you skip
it. But if you're something much
smaller, like your goal is to do one
push-up or 10 push-ups, well, that is a
lot easier and the activation energy is
much lower. And so then you get to that
day eight or nine or 10 days in when
it's 9:30, you can still do 10 push-ups
before you go to bed, right? And so you
still get the feeling of progress. You
still get the feeling that you're moving
forward simply because you set the bar
lower to start. You know, if the bar is
perfect at the beginning, it's really
hard to maintain that for very long. But
if the bar is getting you in now, you
build momentum and you get the feeling
of progress and you get a month or two
months or three months in and you still
have a streak going and you feel pretty
good about yourself. And at some point
you start doing it enough that you
realize, okay, there will probably be a
day in here where I miss, but I still
feel good about who I am and how much
I've shown up here and like you've
proven a lot to yourself. And so I I
think sometimes scaling it down and
making it easy gives yourself a better
opportunity to feel progress. two words
you said in in the last couple of
minutes. One of them was your parents
use a habit tracker and the other one
was use the word streak.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you understand the context of this
jar that was in front of me with with
paper clips? Could you explain to me
habit tracking and streaks and why why
they matter?
>> So when I was working on atomic habits,
I came across this guy named Trent
Durstman and he was uh he had an
interesting story. He's an entrepreneur
now, but early in his career um he had
this job where he was a stock broker in
Abbottzford, Canada. and Abbottzford,
this is like in the '90s time was like
pretty small town, like it it wasn't,
you know, some big uh city. And he was
supposed to just drive more business,
but like, you know, they didn't have a
lot of advantages. It wasn't like he was
in New York or whatever. He had this one
simple habit that he used to end up
becoming the top performer in the firm
and building the biggest book of
business there over like the next couple
years. And it was this simple strategy
of paper clips. So all he did, a lot of
his stockbroker friends who were like
also working in this job, they would
read analyst reports, they would look at
the news, they would try to analyze
company's financial statements. They
were doing all this other stuff. And he
said, "I'm not going to do that. All I'm
going to do
>> is I'm going to make a sales call and
whenever I make a call, see how tight
anybody put these on. Um, whenever
whenever I make a call, I'm going to
make a sales call and then I'm going to
take one paperclip and I'm going to move
it over. And then I'm going to make
another sales call. I'm going to take
another paper clip and move it over. And
he had a hundred paper clips in the jar.
And his goal every day was to move a
hundred from one jar to the next. And
that was all he did. And with that one
simple habit, he ended up building this
huge book of business. Two things about
this. One, obviously, he has a visual
marker of the progress that he's making,
right? So moving paper clips to the
other jar is a way to see that he's
progressing throughout the day. It also
makes it a little bit into like a little
game, you know? It's like, okay, how how
quickly can I move the paper clips over?
How much, you know, progress am I
making? Do I have 50 over by the time
lunch rolls around? You know, you can
start to see how you you have a little
bit of a uh this these progressive
markers throughout the day.
>> But the other thing that I think is
interesting about it is he boiled it
down to just what was the one thing that
really moved the needle, you know, and
he just focused on that. And there are
so many things in life that it's really
easy to get focused on the optimization.
It's so if you are so focused on finding
the perfect sales strategy, the best
business plan, the ideal diet to follow,
you're so focused on optimizing, you're
like, "Okay, how about sometimes people
will come to me and they'll say they
want to build an audience and they like
ask about all the tactics and the
strategies and I say just write an
article every week for the next two
years and then get back to me like that.
Let's not skip that part. Can we start
let's start there or like let's not miss
a workout for two years and then like we
can talk about whether the program is
working or not, you know?" And it's like
that. So I think this helps you focus on
what is the big thing that's really
moving the the needle.
>> I was thinking it about it through the
frame of the habit cycle as well because
as I look at this habit cycle I'm seeing
reward being hit. I'm seeing uh a desire
for an outcome as well.
>> Yeah. Yeah. This is interesting. So
there um we haven't talked about this
yet so let me just break it down real
quick. So if you're building a habit
there are roughly four different stages
that every habit goes through. So I call
them in the book in atomic habits I call
them Q, craving, response and reward.
Right? So the Q is just something that
you notice. So let's say for example you
see a plate of cookies on the counter in
the kitchen. That's a visual cue. The
craving is the prediction that your
brain makes about what that Q means. So
you see the plate of cookies, your brain
predicts, oh that'll be sweet, sugary,
tasty, enjoyable. So that favorable
prediction motivates you to take the
response. That's the third step. You
walk over, pick it up, and take a bite.
And then finally, the fourth step is the
reward. Oh, it is in fact sweet, sugary,
tasty, enjoyable. So, Q, craving,
response, reward.
These steps are basically what every
habitual behavior is going through. Even
even really automatic stuff like let's
say you walk into a room and the lights
are off. So, Q, it's dark. Craving, I
want to be able to see. Response, I flip
on the light switch. Reward, the lights
come on. Now, it's it's visible out
there. So even really fast stuff like
turning on a light switch is going
through those four steps. So pretty much
every habit follows that cycle. And you
can see that you know this uh paperclip
strategy does kind of play into this a
little bit. Q you have the paper clips
on the desk, right? So like not only do
you want to make the sales calls for a
business standpoint, but you also have
these staring at you every morning when
you come into your desk. And so it's a
little bit of a visual reminder, reminds
you, prompts you to think, okay, all
right, I do want to make these calls and
try to drive more business or, you know,
build build up the um make another
successful sales call. That craving gets
you to pick up the phone, the actual
response. And then the reward is I get
to move the paperclip over and now I
feel like yeah, you get the little
>> ting jingle in your ear of the paperclip
hitting and you know, it just get it
adds to the reward effect. What I think
is most interesting is how do we take
this how do we take these four steps
that basically all behaviors go through
and then translate it into something
that we can use and apply in daily life
and work. So I call this the four laws
of behavior change. So there's one for
there's one for each step. Yeah, you got
them right here.
>> I'll give them to you.
>> So I call these the four laws of
behavior change, right? So for the Q,
the first law is you want to make it
obvious. All right? You want the cues.
You want the cues of your good habits to
be obvious, available, visible, easy to
see. Easier it is to see or get your
attention, the more likely you are to
act on it. So, a lot of that's about
environment. It's about making things
obvious, but it's the Q gets your
attention, something you notice.
>> So, let's put this in the context of me
wanting to make sure I have my
supplement routine every day.
>> Sure.
>> Because that's something I think about.
Yeah.
>> I want to have my creatine every day.
>> So, it's like, where's the creatine in
the kitchen? you know, is it is it
tucked up in a high shelf and it's
behind like a cabinet door and you don't
really see it or is it like out on the
counter? It's one of the first things
that you see. So there, you know, there
are varying degrees of what you want to
do here and like what you want to place
out, but you're just trying to make the
good habit obvious. You want to make it
easy to notice. Reminds me of when I
started DJing and the DJing equipment
was upstairs in the spare room out the
way and I had a conversation with my
girlfriend who's through there and I was
like, I really want to learn DJing. So,
can I put it on the kitchen counter for
the next year?
>> Because then I'll be walking past one
day and go, "Oh, DJ." you know, and then
I put it on the kitchen counter and I
started DJing.
>> I have a a reader who he would go to his
guitar lessons and he would practice
with his teacher and then he'd give him
some homework to practice certain scales
or whatever and then he would come back
and he would take his guitar, put it in
the case at the end of each um at the
end of each session and put it in the
closet. Well, he'd forget it was there
for a week and then, you know, the next
week would roll around. He'd pick it out
and go to practice and he'd be like,
"You weren't, you know, you didn't do
this throughout the week." So, he bought
a guitar stand and put it in the center
of the living room. Now he passes it 30
times a day. Much more likely to pick it
up and play for 5 minutes. So it's just
making making your habits obvious. The
second law is about the craving and it's
all about making it attractive. And this
is where um I mentioned earlier like
that question of what would this look
like if it was fun. You want your habits
to be fun, compelling, attractive,
interesting to you. And the more
engaging or exciting it is, the more
likely you are to stick with it. So,
like I had one woman who she wanted to
stop going out to eat for lunch at work
every day and start bringing her lunch
in because she felt like it would be
healthier, but the idea of making like a
salad for lunch wasn't that exciting to
her. So, she came up with this phrase of
a party in a bowl. And so, she in the
beginning she would do all kinds of
stuff. She would like take potato chips
and crumble them up and put them in
there or she would like chop up Snickers
bars and put them in with the salad or
whatever. She was just trying to find a
way to make it fun. And then once she
was already bringing lunch in every day,
you know, after she did this for a month
or so, then she was like, "All right,
I'm in the habit of bringing lunch in.
How can I start to make lunch
healthier?" So, find a way to make your
habit attractive.
>> The third law is to make it easy. This
is all about making it simple,
frictionless, easy to do. The more
convenient or frictionless your habits
are, the more likely they are to occur.
We've talked about this a lot already,
but it's, you know, scaling your habits
down. It's using the two-minute rule to
make it, you know, as easy as you can.
But the easier a habit is to perform,
the more likely it is to happen. Daniel
Conorman, the famous psychologist, I
think he once said that if you were to
boil behavior down to like a single
principle, a single thing that drives
human behavior, it's convenience. It's
ease. You know, what is the what is the
easy thing to do? We are biological
organisms and we expend energy to live.
And it is in your best interest to try
to conserve energy whenever you can. And
so the more your brain is wired for it,
you're always looking for it. In fact,
many of the largest businesses in the
world basically just take a human desire
that we already want to do and try to
make it even more convenient. Like Door
Dash is just like, you need food, just
tap a couple times with your thumb and
we'll give it to you. I mean, in fact,
the whole arc of human history and how
we get food is just been one long path
of making it more and more convenient.
It used to be that we were hunter
gathers and had to kill our food or
forage for berries in the bush. And then
we started growing it so it was right
next to our house and we didn't have to
move. We could just harvest the corn or
the beans or whatever and eat it. And
then we started just shipping it to
grocery stores. Now you don't even have
to grow it yourself. You'll just come
over here and you can buy it and take it
home. And then we said, "Forget it. You
don't even need to drive to the grocery
store anymore. We'll just deliver it
through Instacart or grocery delivery or
whatever." And now we say, "You don't
even have to cook it in your own house
anymore. We'll just you can just order
it on Door Dash. You just tap with your
thumb and we'll bring it readymade to
you right here and you can just eat it.
It's all just one continual long arc of
making it easier and easier. And the
more that you can make your habits more
convenient, the more likely it is that
you're going to stick to it and and
follow through.
>> And then the fourth and final law is to
make it satisfying. The more satisfying
your habits are, the more likely you are
to stick to them in the future and
return to them again. The first three
laws, make it obvious, make it
attractive, and make it easy, are all
about making your habit more likely to
occur this time.
>> Mhm.
>> Make it satisfying is about increasing
the odds that you do it next time.
Because by the time you get to this
step, the habit's already occurred,
right? It's already over now. But was it
rewarding or not? Was it beneficial or
not? Did it serve you in some way? If it
serves you, if you feel like it benefits
you somehow, that marks the experience
in your brain and says, "Hey, this was
useful. Let's come back to this next
time." Next time you're in a similar
situation, let's repeat this again. And
so, make it satisfying. The reward is
kind of it closes the feedback loop of
learning. You know, it increases the
odds that you're going to follow through
on it. And I use that word learning
intentionally. We're talking about
building habits, but in a way, what
we're really talking about is the
process of learning. It's the process of
how your brain and body learn what to do
as you go through life. You know, you go
throughout life and you experience
different things and you come across
different strategies and you try them
out. You know that at some point there's
the first time that you take a bite of a
pancake and then you're like, "Oh,
that's kind of tasty. Maybe I should
take another bite." And other times you
try things and you're like, "I don't
really like that that much." Or it
didn't really do anything. It was kind
of neutral. and your brain's like,
"Well, maybe try something different
next time." So, the behaviors that are
rewarded, the behaviors that are
satisfying, the behaviors that are enjoy
enjoyable are likely to stick. And I
guess there's lots of different ways one
can make it rewarding. I was thinking
about our fitness group, which we have
on WhatsApp, where it's called Fitness
Blockchain, and every month, one person
is evicted. Every day that you go to the
gym, you take a screenshot of your
workout and drop it in there. And then
someone who's like a a freelance data
science person just kind of compiles it
all into a document and send screenshots
every day with our combined workouts.
The whole game is consistency. So it
doesn't matter how hard you worked. It's
just like did you go and that has kind
of made I don't know where that appears
on this cycle, but I think of it as like
accountability. It also makes it fun. Um
but where is that sort of social pact
element on this cycle? Is that the part
of the reward of it?
>> I think it influences all of the
behaviors, you know. So the fact that
you see other people working out is a
cue, right? So like you might get a text
of somebody else's screenshot phone.
You're like, "Oh,
>> yeah,
>> I need to get my workout in today. I
don't want to forget." So that's a cue
that triggers the behavior.
>> There's something attractive about being
part of it as a group. You know that
once you post your screenshot that other
people are going to see it and like you
might get kind of rewarded for it or
like you did your thing. So that's kind
of exciting and feels motivating that
like motivates you to show up and do it.
Um sometimes you may work out with
somebody,
>> right? And so that like that there's
something there that's improving the
response. It's more it's more fun to do
it together, but it also gets you
moving. And then finally, there's the
reward of, you know, sticking to the
streak or being part of it or not
getting
>> we get the rewards. We actually there's
actually a big metal belt, a physical
belt every that's handed out every year,
but every week there's, you know, every
month there's a winner that get gets the
display picture as their face. And
>> I want the belt. That sounds cool.
>> It's got my name engraved in it. It's
like a wrestling belt.
>> That's awesome.
>> How does this work if you're trying to
break a habit? So for each of these
there are there are many ways to do each
of these things. You know there's many
ways to make habits obvious. There are
many ways to make them attractive and so
on. And what I'm giving you is just kind
of the overview of how to build a good
habit or how to install a new behavior.
If you want to break a bad habit then
you just invert these four. So rather
than making it obvious make it
invisible.
>> Okay?
>> Unsubscribe from emails. Don't keep junk
food in the house. Reduce exposure to
the queue. Rather than making it
attractive, make it unattractive. That's
the hardest one. We can talk about that
in a second. Rather than making it easy,
make it difficult. So, increase
friction, add steps between you and the
behavior. I find like here's two
examples for me. I've tried this new
thing where I keep my phone in another
room until lunch each day. So, usually
it's like 9 to 11 or so in the morning.
My phone is down the hall. It's in a
different room and I'm in my office. And
it's just a chance for me to work on my
own priorities rather than whatever's,
you know, coming in through the phone.
I'm like everybody else. If my phone is
right next to me, I will check it every
3 minutes just because it's there. But
if it's down the hall, it's only 30
seconds away, but I never go get it. And
I always think that's interesting. You
know, it's like, did I want it or not?
In the one sense, I wanted it badly
enough that I would check it every 3
minutes when it was right by me, but I
never wanted it so bad that I'd go work
30 seconds to go get it.
>> And I found that a lot of habits are
like that. if you just introduce a
little bit of friction, they kind of
curtail themselves to the desired
degree. So, beer is another one. I I
don't think this would work if you like,
you know, actually have an addiction or
something. But, I've noticed that if I
get like a six-ack of beer and I put it
in the front of the fridge and I open it
up and it's like right there and I can
see it. I'll have one at dinner just cuz
it's there. But, if I put it like on the
lowest shelf in the fridge, like all the
way in the back, I kind of got to bend
down to even see it. Sometimes I'll
forget. I'll have it. It'll be there for
two weeks. I won't even remember that
it's in there. Um, and so I think that's
all about like, you know, inversion of
the first law, make it invisible, and
inversion of the third law, make it
difficult. The the less likely you are
to see it, the harder it is to do, the
more steps that are involved, the less
likely it is to occur. And then the
final piece is the inversion of the last
law, which is rather than making it
satisfying, make it unsatisfying. So
layer on some kind of cost or a
consequence. And I in atomic habits, I
call this the cardinal rule of behavior
change. It's like so pervasive of a
teacher, which is behaviors that get
immediately rewarded get repeated. And
behaviors that get immediately punished
get avoided. And so obvious, but you
have to ask yourself, do you have a good
feeling when you do the thing that
you're you want to do, the habit that
you want to build? Are you getting
immediately rewarded for that? And if
you have a habit you're trying to avoid,
what is the cost? What is the
consequence? Is there something that you
know feels like a punishment there? If
so, then you're more likely to avoid it.
If not, it gets tricky.
>> It's hard, isn't it, with like there's
cookies on the counter out there. You
might have noticed them as you walked in
that you've got them on a little plate.
Loads of
>> No, but I'm going to grab one on the way
out. [laughter]
>> But but I was just thinking about that
like if I have the cookie now, I'm not
going to get an immediate punishment.
The only sort of immediate punishment is
a bit of guilt that I might start to
feel that I'm now one step further away
from the goals that I've set myself in
terms of fitness. Is there any way to
bring forward the the punishment in
areas not the punishment but the the
lack the downside
>> yeah the cost of your good habits is in
the present the cost of your bad habits
is in the future and so for a lot of
your quote unquote bad habits it feels
good in the moment you know like eating
a donut feels great now playing the
video game feels great now doing you
know whatever like it's only later that
you realize oh there was a cost
associated with this even something like
the classic bad habit of smoking Maybe
you get to stand with friends outside
and socialize or maybe you reduce stress
in the moment after a long day of work.
It's only, you know, five or 10 or 20
years later that you have this
consequence. So, um, a lot of the game
of building better habits is finding
ways to pull the rewards of your good
habits into the present moment so you
feel good now. You don't have to wait
three years for it to happen. M
>> and pulling the consequences of your bad
habits into the present moment so that
you feel a little bit of the pain right
now and you realize this isn't actually
serving me.
>> Which I guess is why they put the uh the
photos of people's lungs on the
cigarette packets.
>> That's yeah like one of the things it's
trying to do right.
>> What about this um habit scorecard over
there? Is that what your parents use
with for swimming?
>> So the habit scorecard just a this is
just a simple like assessment. The
insight behind this practice is that
intentional behavior change starts with
self-awareness, right? So you will you
will change your habits all the time
whether you think about them or not.
You're you're building habits whether
you focus on it or whatever. Like your
your brain and body is built for it. Now
the more interesting question is can you
design your behavior? Can you shape your
habits in the way that you want? And
that's where self-awareness comes in.
It's very hard to shape your habits
without being aware of them. And so
there have actually been some studies
that have found that just the act of
becoming more aware of a behavior will
change it on its own. For example, there
was one study that looked at people who
journaled about their they created food
journals for what they were eating. No
tracking of anything. There's no they
were not on a diet. They're not trying
to eat certain way. They don't care
about how many calories you have.
There's no tracking or anything. All
they did was simply write down what they
ate each day. And just the act of
journaling about it changed what people
ate and reduced the the number of
calories that they had and so on just
because they were aware of what was
happening. Um and so
this is true for most habits which is
once you start to notice them then you
start to notice ways that you could
improve them or ways that you could
refine them or ways that maybe you want
to do things differently. You're not
operating as on autopilot in quite the
same way. So the habit scorecard is just
a simple way to do this. It's very it's
very simple. You just write down all the
habits that you're doing each day. So
you can start usually there's like a
package of behaviors in the beginning
and maybe around lunch and then like a
power down routine at the end of the
day. But you know it could be something
like wake up, drink a glass of water,
take a shower, you know, check my phone,
get dressed, whatever. Like you just,
you know, go through the list of what
your normal day looks like. And then
once you have the behaviors written
down, you give them a score. And the
score is just uh if it's a good habit or
a habit that you like that's
contributing to your life, you put a
plus sign. If you it's a habit that you
feel like you want to get rid of. Um
like maybe say I wake up and then I
scroll on my phone for 10 minutes before
I get out of bed. You're like, well, do
I really want to be doing that? Maybe
not. I'll give a minus sign. And then
some stuff's just neutral, you know,
like get dressed, you know, sure,
whatever. Just put a put an equal sign.
And the idea is not to judge yourself
for it. It's more like sometimes I tell
people it's almost like imagine when you
like go to the zoo and you like, you
know, look at the lions and you're like,
"Oh, wow. How interesting that they
would do that." You kind of like do that
with yourself and you're like, "Oh, how
interesting that I spend my time that
you know, you're not like trying to
judge yourself or analyze it. It's just
let me see what I'm actually spending my
time on. And then once you have that
list, I think the and this is like later
in the book, but there's um it becomes
very useful for building habit stacks
for for layering your new habits on top
of the things that you're already doing.
And so some of it self-awareness, some
of it is priming for habit stacking.
>> Habit stacking.
>> Yeah.
>> What is a habit stacking?
>> Look at this. I like these props. This
is great. All right. So, first let me
let me uh just unpack the idea. Habit
stacking is this concept that came from
Stanford professors named BJ Fog. And
his insight, which I think is great, is
that it's easier to build a new habit if
you layer it or stack it on top of an an
old habit, a habit you're already doing.
Um he calls it the tiny habits recipe, I
think. But it's the insight is just that
we all have habits that we're performing
each day and those can become anchors.
they can become cues that prompt the new
behaviors that we're going to perform.
So let's say that your current habit is
you make a cup of coffee, right? So
you're already doing this. You're going
to start each day. You're going to make
a cup of coffee. And the new habit that
you want to build is you want to start
meditating. So then you could say, "All
right, after I make my morning cup of
coffee, I will meditate for 60 seconds."
So that this is just like a basic habit
stack, right? So you start you start
with coffee and then you meditate after.
Now, once you get good at this, you can
start to chain them together. So, for
example, you could say after I make my
morning cup of coffee, I will write my
to-do uh I will meditate for 60 seconds
and then I will write my to-do list for
the day. After I write my to-do list for
the day, I will prioritize them and
start working on, you know, my first
task or whatever. And now you have this
little stack that you do the same way
each morning each time. And it just is a
way to like build simple momentum and
get you in. I have I've got readers who
have made like all kinds of habit
stacks. The one of the funny ones that I
remember is one guy um he was really
into working out and he was always
drinking protein shakes, but he his
finances were kind of a mess. And so
anytime that he would make a protein
shake, he would like check his finances
and check his budget for the day. He
would like when I make a protein shake,
I fill out my daily budget. That was
like his habit stack. Um but you can do
it for anything, right? And the idea is
that you want to find a good place for
this new habit to live. You know,
sometimes like let's say let's take the
meditation example.
As a general rule, as a as a very
broadstroke rule, it tends to be better
to do habits earlier in the day rather
than later because the later it gets in
the day, the the less your day is under
your control, right? Like more things
interrupt. There's just, you know, you
run lower on time, lower on energy, and
so on.
>> So I Yeah, I like in general, I like the
idea of maybe doing meditation in the
morning. So you make your cup of coffee
and then you meditate. But if you have
like three little toddlers that you're
chasing around, you're trying to get
pants on your kids, then maybe that's
not a good time to meditate, right? It's
not it's not a good space for that habit
to live. So, I think once you've done
that habit scorecard and you have like
all of your normal habits laid out
there, you can start to think about the
new habit that you want to build and
look at that list and then say, "Okay,
what's the appropriate place to insert
this this new habit? Where should that
new habit stack live? What's a good
trigger for that new behavior to occur?"
And so you create these little stacks
and then it just eventually it doesn't
take that long but eventually you get
used to just doing in the same order
each time. You know like I have one
woman who she's like every day I walk
into my office, I hang up my purse, I
hang up my jacket, I go fill up my water
bottle, I sit down the desk and I answer
the first email and that's like she just
does that sequence every time she comes
in.
>> I have one I think that's kind of
related which is um and this sounds very
strange to people think I'm weird but
whatever. um is I wanted to learn how to
meditate, but in my day, the way that my
day was currently constructed, there was
no great opportunity where I'm alone for
like 10 to 20 minutes and I'm
uninterrupted and I'm and I'm in that
position. And so what I started doing is
I started meditating in the shower.
>> I'm there anyway getting clean. So it's
great. It's private, [snorts] not long
showers.
>> Yeah, [laughter] long showers. My
girlfriend's like, "What the [__] is
going on in
there sat on the floor?" Um, but no, I
started just meditating in the shower
and it was it was really it was in the
morning alone. I'm going to do it
anyway.
>> Mh.
>> So, that really helped for me. And then
when that started to stick and I started
to get a bit of progress and see the
benefits, I can move out of the shower,
per se.
>> That's great. I had uh you're reminding
me I had a woman who came up to me after
a talk one time and told me that uh she
when she brushes she wanted to work on
her balance. She's getting older. is
getting into her 60s and she said um any
each day when I brush my teeth I brush
on one leg and I do like 10 like little
kind of half squats on that leg and then
I switch to the other leg and I do 10
more on that and she was like I'm my
balance is better my legs are stronger
and my teeth are very clean [laughter]
takes a while but yeah you can pair it
up in all kinds of ways. On that point
of um doing things in the morning and
generally having less energy later in
the day, do you do you think much about
h how to manage your own energy? It's I
spoke to Dr. Lisa Feldman who's a
neuroscientist who came up with this
concept of like the the body budget that
we have this finite amount of energy.
And since then it's really had a big
impact on me because I start in so many
ways that we've talked about. One of
which is I try I try to not try and take
on too much because if in a world where
my energy on a daily basis is finite I
don't want to get to the end of my body
budget but also the order of things like
do I put my most important tasks today
>> at the beginning of the day etc etc
>> I would layer so yes I do think about
this a little bit uh and I've heard this
like you want energy management not time
management you know construct
>> the other thing that I would add to it
that I don't know that I've ever heard
anybody talk about is control so the Um,
the standard thing that everybody says
is, "Oh, we all only have 24 hours in a
day." Which obviously is true, but if
you were to break that into like 24
1-hour chunks and just look at your day
laid out that way, you have different
levels of control over certain 1 hour
chunks than others. Um, so for example,
the, you know, what I said a minute ago,
like if you have a bunch of kids and
you're getting them dressed from like
7:00 to 8 a.m., that hour isn't that
much under your control. It's not a good
time to meditate. It's not a good time
to work out. There's other
responsibilities that tend to happen in
that hour. And so I think that's an
interesting thing too is to map your day
out and look at this and say, "All
right, which hours are is my energy the
best and which hours are most under my
control?" And then you can start to see
like where you're ultimately what I
think you're getting to is what are the
good hours for me? You know, like where
do those live throughout the day? And
then the next step is to ask what is
getting my best hours and what's getting
my leftovers. And I I have had a couple
different times where I've looked at
things and said, "I say this is
important to me, but really it's only
getting my leftover hours." And so then
you're like, "Okay, something might need
to change." So I I think about all of
that. I think about where's uh how much
time do I have in general? Where are the
pockets where I have the most energy or
the best energy? Um and then also where
are the pockets where I have the most
control? And then you try to figure out
how to slot stuff in. And theoretically,
you'd want to put the new hard habits
you're trying to form in areas where you
have the highest degree of control
versus like 11 p.m. at night.
>> Uh, right. I Yeah, I think I think in
general, that's right. It's it's so
tricky when you have multiple things
that really matter to you. You know,
it's it's like, all right, you're
choosing between family, you're choosing
between work, you're choosing between
personal pursuits and these new habits
you're trying to build. Like,
everything's got to kind of work
together. And so, it's a balance of of
shaping all of that.
So many of us are pursuing passive forms
of income and to build side businesses
in order to help us cover our bills. And
that opportunity is here with our
sponsor Stan, a business that I co-own.
It is the platform that can help you
take full advantage of your own
financial situation. Stan enables you to
work for yourself. It makes selling
digital products, courses, memberships,
and more simple products more scalable
and easier to do. You can turn your
ideas into income and get the support to
grow whatever you're building. And we've
just launched Dare to Dream. It's for
those who are ready to make the shift
from thinking to building, from planning
to actually doing the thing. It's about
seeing that dream in your head and
knowing exactly what it takes to bring
it to life. Enter to win $100,000 for
your dream. All you have to do is share
what it is. Learn more at
daretodream.stan.store.
>> Did I ever tell you about the uh data
breach that we had at my previous
company? Yeah, I remember hearing about
that
>> which which um was a total nightmare.
So, I'm glad that we now use one
password.
>> What actually is it, Steve?
>> It's called um one password and they're
the sponsor of the podcast now. And they
have this feature called enterprise
password manager which means that if any
of our passwords across the team are
compromised or leaked then it notifies
us and obviously if that were to be the
case we're at huge risk across the
entire team. through one password EPM,
you can also store all of your sensitive
information and it's helping us to move
closer towards pass keys, which means
eventually everybody will be able to log
in to pretty much everything without
ever having to put a password in.
>> Sounds like a good addition.
>> Yeah, I think it's like the single most
impactful security addition you can make
to your team, especially if your team
has tons of passwords that are all like
hidden in Excel files and stuff. To my
listeners, if you want to secure your
business, head to onepass.com/doac.
One password is a game changer. It's the
future that I always wished would be the
case as someone that has, you know, 20,
30 different passwords for 20, 30
different applications.
The first time we made our little
fitness group on WhatsApp, it was about
how many calories you could burn.
>> And that was what awarded you the points
and won the competition. Didn't last
long.
>> Didn't last long for a number of
reasons. Kind of toxic, unfair, because
I have I weigh more than anyone in the
group, so I burn more calories just by
standing up. Um, and then it moved to
this this idea of consistency. How do
you think about what is better? Is it
better to be consistent or is it better
to be something else?
>> I feel like there there's this story
that people tell themselves a lot which
is they want to do the big impressive
thing, you know, like you want to do um
you want to run a marathon, you want to
do a week-l long silent meditation
retreat, you want to, you know, write
the bestselling book, whatever. And I I
think about it as this balance between
consistency and intensity. So intensity
is a good story. It's I I ran the
marathon. I did the silent meditation
retreat. consistency actually makes
progress. You know, it's I meditate for
five minutes each day. I run, you know,
three days a week or whatever. And so,
people need consistency more than they
need intensity. And in fact, what I
would say is
consistency enlarges ability.
Consistency enlarges ability. It's the
act of showing up consistently that
builds your capacity to do something,
that fosters the skill development and
growth that you want. And so showing up,
even if it's just in a small way, is the
way that you actually create the
opportunity to do something more intense
or more impressive down the line.
I also think that there's this
deep important lesson that comes from
appreciating consistency and what's
required there. Consistency
is often adaptability. It's flexibility.
There's this there's this story about
like mental toughness and being discip
like being a disciplined person that um
that we tell ourselves that's something
like you know I grind to make sure this
happens. I will I will you know make it
happen no matter what the circumstances
like that the mentally tough person
pushes through regardless of what they
face. But I think that in real life a
lot of the time consistency is actually
being flexible. It's being adaptable.
You know if you don't have enough energy
you do the easier version. If you don't
have enough time you do the short
version. You find a way to not throw up
a zero that day. you find a way to show
up even if it's not ideal. And that is
actually being very mentally tough. And
so the the adaptable person is the one
that um what's that line? It's uh when
the storm came, the oak tree fought it
and broke, but the willow bent and
survived. And so it's like you need a
way to manage the storms of life and
bend with them while still showing up.
If you purely fight against it, you
think that you'd think that being tough,
that being mentally tough is like, I'm
gonna make sure this happens. But it
actually makes you somewhat brittle. You
know, you need it to be a certain way.
And when you need life to be a certain
way to succeed, you become held hostage
by the situation.
>> You know, you need it to be just like
that. But if in fact you can be
adaptable and you can be flexible, now
you are actually more resilient. Um, and
so I think there's a a balance to strike
there. and it it feeds into the
consistency that will ultimately uh
enlarge your ability.
>> I think this is such an important point
that I don't often hear people talk
about. It reminds me of my friend. My
friend, one of my best friends, he has a
tendency to feel like he's cracked
fitness. And what tends to happen is
he'll work out and go to the gym for
like 3 months and he'll then announce
that he's finally cracked it like the
consistency, the motivation. And the
minute he does that is like 30 days
before he falls off again because I
think I think he gets complacent. Life
is going to happen. And I remember
saying to him one one year, I mean, I've
known him for 15 years now. I was like,
um, the thing I've come to learn about
the gym and fitness is that you never
crack it. And actually, the mindset that
every single day I could fall off and
that life happens has helped me be
consistent. Whereas a version of me in
2017 set this ridiculous goal, which was
I was going to go to the gym every
single day without fail. And then five
months in where life happened and I
missed a day, my motivations was gone
and I fell off. You see this a lot with
top performers in in many different
domains, which is it's not that they
don't make mistakes or they don't slip
up. Everybody slips up, but they tend to
get back on track quickly. And so really
what you need is not a perfect plan or
like a system that never fails. What you
need is a good plan for getting back on
track. You need if the reclaiming of a
habit is fast, the breaking of it
doesn't matter that much. You get to the
end of the year and it's just like a
little blip on the radar, but you need a
good plan for getting back on track
quickly. So, I I think that uh some of
the balance, some of the some of the
strategy is actually knowing what to do
when you fail.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and if you if you figure that out,
then uh you're in a good position to
bounce back quickly.
>> Funnily enough, when I fail, when I fall
off my gym workout or whatever, what I
do is I I set the display picture on my
iPhone to red. And I guess this is a
point of self-awareness. It just reminds
me that we've currently fallen off. That
means every time I look at my phone,
it's a reminder that this is code red.
>> Wow, that's great. What a strong visual
sign. Yeah. And that I need to start
doing the small steps, doing the [__]
workouts again,
>> you know. So, I have this um I have this
little theory that the secret to winning
is actually learning how to lose. It's
that the secret to winning is knowing
how to lose. Um and what I mean is that
it's knowing how to handle a loss. It's
knowing how to rebound and bounce back
from that. I think that I learned it
through sports. I don't think sports is
the only way you can learn it. I think
probably anything that you do with some
level of public visibility could teach
you. you know, musical performance or
being in a fitness group with your
friends or there's lots of ways you do
it, speaking publicly.
>> But one thing about sports is that
you're going to fail in front of the
rest of the team, you know, like the
ball will come to you'll start make the
strikeout to end the game or like you
know, you go uh into the gym and work
out with the team and like you miss a
lift or you're the weak one or whatever.
Like that doesn't feel good, but then
you realize life moves on and you got to
go on to the next set and you have to
show up again the next time. And each
little instance where there's like a
little failure like that is practice for
you to bounce back again. And I think
it's important to have something in life
that's like that that's teaching you how
to respond to failure. That you're
learning how to lose and how to bounce
back from a loss so that you can
ultimately win. I got to the point at
the end of my career um my senior year
where I was basically like listen I
don't want to lose but if we're going to
lose I'd rather it be me. I'd rather be
out there. Give it put it on my
shoulders. I can take the loss, you
know, I can I can handle it. I I'll give
you everything I have to try to get us
to win, but if we lose, like, I'll be
able to bounce back from it. And I think
that that ended up serving me really
well in my entrepreneurial career
because stuff is never going to go your
way all the time. Um, and you need to be
able to try, be willing to try things
and be willing to sometimes look foolish
because of them and still find a way to
show back up the next time.
>> Reminds me of watching Roger Fedra's
commencement speech. He's arguably the
best tennis player of all time. And
shockingly, in his commencement speech,
I don't know if you saw it, he talks
about how in his career he's missed
something like 47% of the points. So,
he's the best to ever do it. And he's he
only in his career has won 53% of the
points, which means that half the time
he's taking L's. But the difference is
what he does when he takes the L and not
allowing that L that that missed point
to compound into what his next shot. M
and I was in LA with my friends for my
birthday. My friend Ash, who's had the
most paddle training. We were playing
paddle. We do, that's what we do
basically all the time when we see each
other, our group of friends. He'd had
the most paddle training. He's been in
Spain with a coach. But when he lost a
point, he would then start losing easy
points. And there's this photo of me
watching him play and I'm like, "What
the hell's going on with him?" Like,
he's the best. He's meant to be the best
player. He's got the most practice, most
repetitions. But when he loses a point,
this downward spiral takes place where
he just starts missing easy shots. So
when he sat down, I told him about Rod
Roer Fedra's thing. And I gave him this
little idea in his head to to handle the
loss. And I said to him, when you lose
the point, say in your head, that point
doesn't matter. I'm going to win this
game anyway because I am the better
player. And I still get goosebumps when
I say it because he went from being the
fifth best in our group of five to
beating all of us
>> immediately.
>> And there's there's it's so funny cuz my
girlfriend and everyone here knows like
he was like dancing through the house
the same day. He beat all of us. I had
never been beaten by him. I have a pal
in my garden. Like he beat me
immediately. And all it was was was
making sure that when he took an L, he
didn't spiral into his emot the
emotional center of his brain and start
catastrophizing which he's susceptible
to if you know him. He went straight
back into the prefrontal cortex, the
rational center of his brain. And he and
he said he and you know he's posted
about it online and I actually part of
my Asia tour recently was I showed all
the videos and all the WhatsApp messages
of this whole thing happening. But it
just goes to show that actually it's how
you take the L.
>> I love those mindset shifts. It's just a
it's living life with a next play
mentality,
>> you know? It's like you don't let the
last play dictate you or like ruin you.
It's we have to move on and make the
next best choice now. We have to we have
to live for the next play. Um
>> and how much emotion just like ruins our
training.
>> Sure.
>> You know.
>> Yeah. I feel like a lot of this is
there's a great book Inner Game of
Tennis um that came out many many years
ago. Might even be 50 at this point. Um
but it's basically all about this. It's
about not getting in your head. And it's
it's specifically for tennis, but it
applies to life, you know. It's it's
just about um yeah, it's moving on and
having this next play mentality.
>> So David Braford said that to me as well
about one of his main objectives when he
had the cycling team was to get them not
to think about the race while they were
on the race. And he said, I think it was
Chris Chris Hoy or someone. He said my
entire training with Chris Hoy was
getting him to stop thinking about the
current race he was in. and that when
Chris was hit his personal bests, he
would get off the the bike and have no
recollection of cycling.
>> He goes to the point that it was like he
was asleep on the bike because when the
alternative meant that Chris would start
thinking about his time and then cycling
too hard and exhausting himself and fall
out of his his training. So, fascinating
fascinating um you talk about daily
mental mindsets as well. Is it important
to adopt a particular daily mental
mindset? Well, I um I had this thought
that uh
one time I had this thought that it
would be cool to be able to hire a
mental performance coach who just did
one thing. So you you hire this coach
and then they call you up each morning
like 8 a.m. or something and they give
you like a five minute pep talk, you
know, or just they give you like a five
minute mindset shift, just something
little kind of like what you said to
your friend, you know, and just like you
get this little mindset shift to reset
your day and go into it with momentum
and they hang up and you just go do your
thing. Um, and you know, I I couldn't
find anybody who, you know, could do
that, but I've been working on this
little project where I've been trying to
figure out how to do it. And so, I came
up with, it sounds almost kind of silly,
but I'm really excited about it. I came
up with this Atomic Habits daily
calendar. And the idea is just, it's
actually like a blend of Atomic Habits,
Principles, and 321, which is my weekly
newsletter. And I just have like one
little mindset shift that's on each
page. And it's just one page for each
day of the year. You just look at it,
read that page, boom, go into your day.
And like it's just intended to be a
little mindset shift. Anyway, it's a
it's just a small thing, but I like I
like the idea of priming yourself to
start the day in the right way. And um I
don't know. I didn't think that I would
be excited about a calendar, but I'm I'm
kind of excited about it. I kind of feel
like it it could be good. So,
>> is it coming out?
>> Yes, it'll be out in uh it'll be out
soon. Yeah.
>> Okay. And where where would we find
that? Do we sign up to the
>> uh It's on Amazon. You can you can go
there or you know, you can go to
jamesclair.com and you'll you'll find it
there. But um yeah,
>> so this book, the Atomic Habits
Workbook, Simple Exercises for Building
the Life You Want is now out. It came
out this week. What is this the
distinction between these two books? If
I read Atomic Habits already,
>> let me have a book. All right. So, um
Atomic Habits is
the culmination of basically 10 years of
work and effort for me. Um, it's like I
my objective was to write the best book
that's ever been written on habits. Now,
I don't know that I achieved that or
not. That's for the readers to decide,
but I don't think you're ever going to
just stumble into that result. You know,
like you have to at least strive for it.
Um, and so that was the hope is that
everything that you would could possibly
need to know about building good habits
and breaking bad ones should be in
Atomic Habits. So then you're like,
okay, why would I need a workbook? Um,
but uh what I've learned over the last
seven years of this being out and
selling 25 million copies is that people
always need more tangible practical help
with implementing their habits. So,
Atomic Habits is the full guide and the
philosophy and the approach on how to do
it. Then you finish this book and you
sit there and you say, "All right,
great. I have some habits I want to
build. How do I do that?" And the
exercises in the workbook are intended
to help you do that. They help you look
at your environment and figure out how
do I optimize it? They help you look at
your goals and how do I translate it
into a system. They help you look at
your desired identity and how are my
habits reinforcing it. So it's just a
series of exercises that help you apply
and implement the ideas from atomic
habits.
>> The great thing about the way that you
write is it's so unbelievably
accessible. So unbelievably accessible
in the context which means that you
don't need to be a scientist or an
expert to understand the concepts. And I
think that's why the book has been
atomic habits has been so unbelievably
successful. This book, the workbook,
follows in the same vein. It allows
people at all levels of their knowledge
of habits and intellect to get going and
to start sort of holding themselves
accountable. I'd say accountability is a
huge part of this. I kind of see
elements of that fitness group I
described, fitness blockchain, just
because you're reflecting and you're
writing down what happened. And um like
you said earlier about how just
journaling increases the likelihood of a
behavior. Um this book will raise your
self-awareness. Yes, that's a good
that's actually a great summary of it. I
think it uh it makes you more aware of
your habits and your environment and
what you're trying to do specifically
rather than just understanding the
concepts.
>> James, thank you. Thank you for um
changing so many people's lives. You
must hear this all the time, but what a
remarkable remarkable um impact you must
have had on so many people you'll never
get to meet. Getting them to quit habits
that would have otherwise been fatal for
them. You know, my dad is a prime
example of someone who was smoking for
20 odd years of his life. He starts
reading about these habit cycles in your
work, but in other people's work as
well, and he's quit smoking and that's
probably extended his life to some
degree. And that's one such example of
I'd say 25 million because I know the
Atomic Habits has sold 25 million, but
you've reached many many many millions
of people through your newsletter as
well, 321. um which is the I mean the
newsletter has kind of created a
blueprint for anyone that writes a
newsletter. Frankly, I think everybody
looks up to your work and what you've
built as the the framework for starting
their own newsletters. And you know, you
never get you'll never get to see the
downstream impact of the work you've
done. But on behalf of everybody who's
had their life ch changed because of the
hard work you've put in and your
obsession and your focus and your
passion and these incredible works of
art that you've written and that you
didn't rush. Um, thank you and thank you
on behalf of myself because your h your
work has been super formative in how I
think about business, how I think about
my team. Um, and many of the phrases
that we use in our office every single
day to build the companies we've built
have come from your work as well.
Everybody needs to go out. I mean, if
you don't have Atomic Habits, then I
don't know what you've been doing with
your life. But, um, now that the Atomic
[clears throat] Habits workbook is here,
you now have a much more um,
self-awareness inducing, practical,
hands-on framework for implementing some
of the stuff you've read in Atomic
Habits. Now, I'm going to link both of
them below so everybody can go grab
them. But also, your James' newsletter
is phenomenal. So, I'll link that below
as well. We do have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for.
>> Question that has been left for you.
Dear next person in the chat,
what do you believe is the best way to
unify people of differing or even
conflicting beliefs?
Let me know your thoughts. Best Kamal
Harris. I think the best way is to scale
it down. You know, if you say, "How can
we have a more unified nation, it's big,
it's vague, it's it's almost impossible,
it's like an intractable level." But if
you scale it down now, you can come up
with things. You know, how can you have
a more unified neighborhood? You could
start a book club or do a block party or
you can come up with all kinds of things
that you could do. And what you find is
that in many cases in life, problems are
intractable at a certain level, at a
certain scale. And if you shift what
level you're at, suddenly it reveals
itself and there's a new solution. And
so I think that is obviously true uh
with big picture things like like the
question I was asked but it's also true
for your habits. You know if you think
about your life in general and you say
how can I have a better life or how can
I figure out my purpose? How can I
figure out you know how to have a life
of meaning? These are big hard
questions. They're sometimes they're
almost intractable. They're too vague.
They're too broad. But if you can scale
it down and say how can I live a good
day today or how can I have a good week?
How can I have um you know a good next
hour? how can I make this minute as
perfect as possible? Well, those those
levels are much more achievable. And so,
I think if you scale your habits down to
a level that's more solvable, you'll
often see that there's a path forward
there.
>> What's interesting with your
neighborhood analogy as well is that
neighborhoods are interconnected.
>> So, if I if I focus on making my
neighborhood good, then that kind of
just crosses over with the next
neighborhood. Like thinking about my
street where I used to live
>> and so if that neighborhood becomes
good, it's going to then hit the next
domino, which is the neighborhood next
door. and then eventually called
>> which is also true for your personal
life. You know your each unit of time
each little habit is connected. You know
you put your habits together and you
kind of end up with this system of
behaviors that influence your day and
your week. So mastering this hour makes
the next hour a little bit better as
well.
>> There's I ultimately chose the phrase
atomic habits for three reasons. There's
there's three meanings to the word
atomic. The first is tiny or small like
an atom which obviously I think your
habit should be small and easy to do.
The second meaning is the one we're
talking about now and the one people
often forget which is an atom is a
fundamentally unit in a larger system.
So atoms build in molecules, molecules
build in compounds and so on. And your
habits are kind of like the little units
of your day. You know, collectively you
put them together and you have your
daily routine. And then the third
meaning is the source of immense energy
or power. And so if you put all three of
these together, you kind of understand
the narrative arc of the book, which is
you make changes that are small and easy
to do. You layer them together like
units in a larger system and
collectively you get this powerful
remarkable result as a process and so or
as a consequence and that is the idea
behind atomic habits. You make these
small changes and it's not just one it's
like a hundred or a thousand of them and
collectively they come together to
create this powerful impressive life.
>> Powerful impressive life. Do you think
that we should all be aiming at this is
a bit of an interesting word but
happiness is that should that is that
the north star that our habits should
ladder up towards or fulfillment or
whatever one might say or meaning
for first of all I think we should
distinguish between happiness and
meaning you know or happiness and
purpose or something fulfillment I don't
think they're necessarily the same you
know like there are many moments in my
life when I am happy uh and that can be
in the moment and a lot of the most
meaningful things that I worked on you
know atomic habits was one of the most
meaningful projects that I've worked on.
It seems to have made a big difference
for a lot of people or helped a lot of
people. I feel great about that. But I
wasn't necessarily happy every minute
that I was working on it. You know, like
it was it was quite difficult in lots of
different times and it took a long time
and it was arduous and so on, but it
provides a lot of meaning. So, I
definitely think it was worth it even if
I wasn't always happy in the moment. So,
I don't know that you should necessarily
optimize for any of that all the time.
Um, you know, I don't think your habits
will lead you to some place where you
are just permanently happy. Um, but
they will definitely take you on a
journey where happiness is part of it
and where meaning can be part of it. Um,
and there are lots of other things that
are parts of life too. But, uh, yeah, I
I think that you will be well served to
invest in them for sure.
>> James, thank you so much. It's been
>> Thank you. And thank you so much for
saying those kind things. That's uh
that's very nice of you. Um, I have been
incredibly
lucky and blown away by the reception to
the book and um, it just feels it feels
great to know that people are finding it
useful. You know, all I wanted to do was
try to be useful and helpful and um, I
appreciate you saying that and I'm I'm
grateful that many other people have
found it helpful as well.
>> Yeah, I don't think you'll ever realize,
you know, you see 25 million people have
bought the book, but it's much bigger
than that. It's it's billions of people
have been impacted by that because
everybody is like a like a pebble thrown
into the ocean, right? There's these
ripple effects that go on and it changes
their professional life, their personal
life, their health, their friendships,
relationships. So, it's unbelievable.
Thank you, James. Thank you. Thank you.
[music]
This is something that I've made for
you. I realize that the Dio audience are
strivals
that we want to accomplish. And one of
the things I've learned is that when you
aim at the big big big goal, it can feel
incredibly psychologically uncomfortable
because it's kind of like being stood at
the foot of Mount Everest and looking
upwards. The way to accomplish your
goals is by breaking them down into tiny
small steps. And we call this in our
team the 1%. And actually this
philosophy is highly responsible for
much of our success here. So, what we've
done so that you at home can accomplish
any big goal that you have is we've made
these 1% diaries and we released these
last year and they all sold out. So, I
asked my team over and over again to
bring the diaries back, but also to
introduce some new colors and to make
some minor tweaks to the diary. So, now
we have a better range for you. So, if
you have a big goal in mind and you need
a framework and a process and some
motivation, then I highly recommend you
get one of these diaries before they all
sell out once again. And you can get
yours now at the diary.com where you can
get 20% off our Black Friday bundle. And
if you want the link, the link is in the
description below. [music]
[music] Heat. Heat.